CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cirpj

Physics-based feature enhancement method and physics constraint
Transformer model for multi-step tool wear and RUL prediction
Shanglei Jiang a , Haoyuan Zhang a , Zhengmao Chen a, Yuwen Sun b,* , Xuexia Liu a,*
a
b

School of Mechanical Engineering, Dalian Jiaotong University, Dalian 116028, China
School of Mechanical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Tool wear prediction
RUL prediction
Feature enhancement
Physics constraints
Multi-step prediction

In intelligent manufacturing, tool wear monitoring (TWM) and remaining useful life (RUL) prediction are crucial
for improving production quality and efficiency. However, achieving accurate and reliable multi-step (long-term)
predictions remains a substantial challenge. This research proposes a feature enhancement method and con­
structs a Transformer model that embeds hard-soft physics constraints for multi-step wear and RUL prediction.
Firstly, the fast adaptive Brownian bridge aggregation algorithm (fABBA) is employed to extract the features
from multiscale signals during machining, alleviating the reliance on domain knowledge inherent in traditional
feature engineering to some extent. On this basis, a physics-based feature enhancement method is proposed to
improve the model’s generalization. Secondly, a Transformer model based on multi-head self-attention and crossattention mechanisms is constructed for multi-step tool wear and RUL prediction. Meanwhile, a hard-soft
physical constraint embedding module is designed to ensure that the model's output has a certain degree of
physical interpretability. Finally, the PHM2010 and self-constructed datasets are employed to verify the effec­
tiveness of the proposed method. Shapley Additive Explanations (SHAP) analysis method is used to quantita­
tively analyze the contribution of features to the model. The wear comparison experiments on the PHM2010
dataset, using C6 as the test set, show that the proposed model achieves RMSE values of 1.680672 ± 0.137001,
2.220760 ± 0.145516, 3.430798 ± 0.485509, and 5.106184 ± 0.690110 for 12, 24, 36 and 48 step predictions,
respectively. Even for the ultra-long wear prediction, the R2 remains at 0.981760 ± 0.005227, which is better
than GRU, BiGRU, BiGRU-AT, and TCN models.

1. Introduction

tools, but also helps to establish an active maintenance mechanism,
thereby improving machining efficiency and quality.
The current prediction models for tool wear and RUL can be classi­
fied into physical models, data-driven models, and physics-data fusion
models [9]. Physics-based models estimate tool wear by establishing
mathematical relationships between wear progression and observable
physical quantities. Researchers have conducted a large number of
preliminary studies, such as the classical Taylor equation [10], the
Archard wear model [11], and the Usui wear model [12]. On this basis,
researchers have further expanded these models to adapt them to
diverse machining conditions. For example, the Taylor equation has
been extended to incorporate the effects of temperature [13], cutting
parameters [14], and tool geometry parameters [15]. Similarly, a
modified Archard model based on deformation energy has been devel­
oped to describe complex wear mechanisms [16]. Additionally,
extended models incorporating specific workpiece material properties,

With the rapid development of manufacturing technology, particu­
larly the rising demand for precision components, existing machining
methods pose unprecedented challenges to the stable operational effi­
ciency and reliability of precision computer numerical control (CNC)
machine tools. During the machining process, due to the synergistic
effects of thermal loads, friction and others [1–3], tool wear is inevi­
table. Under the cumulative influence, the cutting tools are prone to
failure. According to statistics, cutting tool failures and workpiece
damage caused by severe tool wear account for 20 % of the total
downtime of machine tools [4,5]. In addition, tool failures due to wear
also reduce overall equipment effectiveness, deteriorate workpiece
surface roughness, and cause dimensional accuracy deviations [6–8].
Therefore, the prediction of tool wear and RUL is particularly important.
It not only provides effective early warnings for the progressive failure of
* Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: ywsun@dlut.edu.cn (Y. Sun), xuexiamail@163.com (X. Liu).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2026.01.001
Received 12 September 2025; Received in revised form 3 December 2025; Accepted 8 January 2026
Available online 14 January 2026
1755-5817/© 2026 CIRP.

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

of cutting parameters. Additionally, physics-informed model architec­
ture design [42] and residual modeling [43] also provide a way to
physics-data fusion. It is worth noting that the residual structure
essentially learns the deviation between the physical model and the
actual values, and uses this deviation to correct the prediction results. It
is unable to introduce the corresponding strict physical constraints.
Recently, researchers have proposed novel approaches integrating
physics and data, and have achieved remarkable results. For instance,
for toolpaths with continuously varying radial immersions or feed rates,
Liu et al [44]. propose an in-process force coefficients monitoring
method. Furthermore, the edge force coefficients have been proven to be
effective in estimating the tool’s flank wear. Pashmforoush et al [45].
introduced a physics-informed ML method for TWM. By combining
thermomechanical models with ML techniques, this approach mitigates
the limitation of traditional methods that rely heavily on extensive
experimental data. In another study by the authors [46], they developed
a sequence-based physical-guided machine learning (PIML) model.
Specifically, this model predicts tool wear based on cutting forces,
machining parameters, and tool geometry. Experimental results
demonstrate a prediction accuracy of 94 % on unseen test data. To
address the heavy data demand of data-driven models and the limited
ability of simplified physics-based models to capture the real complexity
of machining processes, Sun et al [47]. proposed a hybrid-driven GPR
model for TWM. Specifically, a health index based on feature adapt­
ability analysis and Gaussian-weighted moving average filtering was
constructed. A novel explicit physical model for tool wear is developed.
By utilizing the health index and physical model to constrain the mean
function of GPR, higher prediction accuracy is achieved. Compared to
purely data-driven models, physics-informed GPR significantly en­
hances prediction smoothness and reliability, reducing the width of the
95 % confidence interval and variance by 46.44 % and 60.80 %,
respectively.
TWM provides decision support for tool replacement through realtime wear condition monitoring. However, this approach primarily re­
flects instantaneous states and cannot capture the evolution of tool wear.
In contrast, multi-step prediction methods for tool wear and RUL holds
greater significance [48]. Utilizing limited historical data, these
methods predict wear and RUL values over multiple future time steps.
This capability facilitates the scheduling of optimal tool replacement
windows, thereby establishing an active maintenance alert mechanism.
Consequently, multi-step prediction methods not only enhance tool
utilization efficiency and reduce production costs, but also effectively
mitigate the risk of unplanned downtime.
Multi-step prediction method has attracted widespread attention
from researchers. Recently, researchers have explored the combination
of feature selection strategies with prediction models to achieve multistep wear prediction. For example, Sun et al [49]. selected the fea­
tures strongly related to the tool degradation process based on mono­
tonicity metrics. Furthermore, a stacked bidirectional long short-term
memory with attention mechanism (AT-SBiLSTM) model was con­
structed to realize multi-step prediction. Xue et al [50]. introduced a
dual-index scheme based on Spearman's correlation coefficient and
mutual information index. On this basis, a hybrid model of multi-scale
time convolution network - stacked bidirectional gated recurrent units
- multi-head attention (MSTCN-SBiGRU-MHA) was constructed. The
results showed that the R2 of the model exceeded 0.86 at steps 1, 5 and
10.
Based on the above, multi-step prediction has achieved significant
progress. However, it still faces some challenges that need to be further
addressed. The main points are as follows:

machining methods, and application scenarios have been widely applied
in tool wear and RUL prediction [17–19]. In recent years, Bai et al [20].
developed a semi-analytical model to predict the evolution of tool wear
during drilling of carbon fiber–reinforced polymer (CFRP). This model
can also predict the average half axis lengths based on the wear rate and
wear geometry. Seeholzer et al [21]. proposed an analytical model to
effectively predict the evolution of tool micro-geometry wear. Further­
more, this model is able to reproduce key wear characteristics, such as
cutting-edge rounding, clearance angle decreasing and flank contact
length increasing. These dynamically reproduced characteristics further
facilitate the optimal design of cutting tools and the selection of
machining parameters. With the widespread application of sensors, the
combination of physical models and signal processing techniques has
provided a new approach for tool condition monitoring. Zhang et al
[22]. established a milling force model considering tool runout and
wear. On this basis, they proposed a wear monitoring method based on
seven-channel specific cutting force coefficient features, in which mill­
ing forces, spindle vibrations, and currents are adopted as monitoring
signal sources. Long-time milling experiments demonstrated that this
method can effectively evaluate the tool condition.
In addition, data-driven models leverage the powerful capabilities of
machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) methods to establish
high-dimensional mapping relationships between machining signals and
wear states, thereby achieving more accurate predictions of tool wear
and RUL [23–25]. Further research has shown that multi-source sensors
can provide more comprehensive information about tool degradation
processes, which is beneficial for enhancing the predictive ability of
data-driven models [26,27]. The data-driven model prediction for tool
wear and RUL can be divided into the following steps: data acquisition
and preprocessing, feature engineering, model training and prediction
[28–31]. Effective feature engineering is crucial for the prediction per­
formance of data-driven models. This is due to the large scale of the
obtained data. Statistical features need to be extracted from the original
signals through time domain, frequency domain and time-frequency
domain analysis [32].
Although data-driven models have been widely applied and have
demonstrated superior performance, most of these models exhibit strong
dependence on high-quality data, and their output lacks interpretability.
These limitations significantly constrain the reliability and generaliza­
tion capability of data-driven models [33]. Therefore, some researchers
have begun to explore integrating physical models or physical laws into
data-driven models to leverage the advantages of both [34–36]. The
physics-guided loss function is a common approach in physics-data
fusion models. For example, in order to explicitly characterizing the
degradation process, Wang et al [37]. designed a physics-guided loss
function considered the monotonicity and trend of the tool wear process.
Li et al [38]. designed a physics-based loss function to constrain model
training. Physics modeling based on Wiener process is another method
for integrating physics and data. Li et al [39]. constructed linear and
nonlinear degradation models with different drift terms. Based on this,
they proposed a Wiener-based RUL prediction method that incorporates
multiple degradation patterns. Li et al [40]. also established a tool life
model based on nonlinear Wiener processes. The difference is that the
evolution laws of different wear stages are taken into account in this
model. In addition, Gaussian processes are also employed in
physics-data fusion. For example, under the assumption that the tool
wear is a progressive process, Li et al [41]. utilized the covariance matrix
of the Gaussian process regression (GPR) model to constrain the pre­
dicted values at adjacent times to a linear relationship, thereby
achieving the wear modeling under the condition of continuous changes

180

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Firstly, feature engineering is the core support for the prediction
models. Its construction quality directly determines the completeness of
the tool degradation process representation and the generalization of the
prediction model.
Secondly, tool wear is a progressive failure process under the

coupling effects of material fatigue damage and thermo-mechanical load
in essence. Its degradation process exhibits strong nonlinear and
nonstationary characteristics. How to use limited historical information
to accurately predict tool wear and RUL at multiple time points in the
future is still worth further exploration.

Fig. 1. Overall framework for multi-step prediction of tool wear and RUL. This framework includes five main steps: signal acquisition, feature extraction based on
STSA method, physics-based feature enhancement, model construction, multidimensional experiment analysis.
181

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Thirdly, data-driven models are still mainly used in the existing
multi-step prediction. These models fail to effectively integrate the
physical laws of tool wear. This limitation easily leads to the physically
inconsistent output of the model, which limits its application in the
actual machining conditions.
Finally, limited by the ‘black box’ characteristics of data-driven
models, the decision-making transparency of data-driven models is
low, which makes it difficult to meet the reliability requirements of
prediction results in industrial scenarios. Utilizing effective analysis
methods can enhance the interpretability and provide quantitative ex­
planations for the decision-making mechanism of the models.
To address the above limitations, this paper proposes a new multistep prediction method, and its overall framework is shown in Fig. 1.
It mainly includes five parts: signal acquisition, feature extraction based
on symbolic time series approximation (STSA) method, physics-based
feature enhancement, model construction, multidimensional experi­
ment analysis. Furthermore, a comparison with other classic physicsguided constraint methods is presented in Table 1.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

4. The interpretability analysis method based on SHAP offers an indepth explanation of the decision mechanism of the prediction
model. By accurately quantifying the contribution of each feature,
this method not only reveals the relative importance of different
features in the tool wear and RUL prediction task, but also clarifies
the specific influence of these features on the model behavior, which
significantly improves the reliability of the prediction results in the
actual application environment.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 de­
scribes the theoretical framework of the proposed method in detail.
Section 3 introduces the dataset and preprocessing methods. In Section
4, the proposed method is analyzed and validated. Section 5 concludes
the paper and gives an outlook on future work.
2. Methodology
2.1. Multi-scale feature extraction based on STSA
2.1.1. Multiscale signal decomposition
Multi-scale signal decomposition techniques decompose complex
non-stationary signals into sub-signals of different frequency scales,
providing more comprehensive feature information related to tool wear
and RUL [51]. In this study, DWT is applied to decompose nonstationary
machining signals into multiple scales, effectively capturing the key
information associated with tool degradation. Firstly, given signal x(t),
after DWT, its low frequency and high frequency components can be
expressed as [52]:
∑
cAj [n] =
h[m]⋅x[2n − m]
(1)
m

1. A physics-based feature enhancement method is proposed.
Compared with the residual physics fusion method, this method does
not require the explicit introduction of error between the physicsbased and data-driven models, thereby avoiding gradient insta­
bility and potential overfitting due to the explicit modeling of the
residual error. Furthermore, the generated physics-based benchmark
wear curve provides a unified reference across different machining
conditions, enhancing the generalization capability.
2. A multi-step wear and RUL prediction model is constructed. This
model is based on a Transformer and embeds hard–soft physics
constraints. The experimental results show that the proposed method
can accurately predict tool wear and RUL under 12, 24, 36 and 48
steps.
3. This paper proposes a physical-information hard-soft constraint
embedding module. Compared with the individual monotonic con­
straints and uncertainty-weighted multitask loss function, the pro­
posed method achieves coordinated prediction of tool wear value
and RUL. In addition, this method avoids the amplification of
abnormal task effects caused by weight imbalance, thereby
improving the stability and reliability of the model.

cDj [n] =

Constraint
type

Physical
consistency

Dependence
on physical
model

Applicable
scenarios

Monotonicity
constraint

Hard

√

×

Residual
physics
fusion

Hard

×

√

Uncertaintyweighted
multitask
loss

Soft

×

×

Ours

Hard
+ Soft

√

√

Simple systems
with monotonic
degradation
behavior
Systems
governed by
well-defined
physical models
Data-driven
multitask
learning
problems
without explicit
physics
Complex
systems with
incomplete or
implicit
physical
mechanisms

m

g[m]⋅x[2n − m]

(2)

where cAj [n] and cDj [n] are the low-frequency approximation coefficients
and high-frequency detail coefficients of the j TH layer, respectively.
h[m] and g[m] represent the coefficients of the low-pass and high-pass
filters, respectively. [2n − m] denotes downsampling operation.
In an orthogonal wavelet, the low-pass filter h[m] and the high-pass
filter
g[m]
satisfy
the
orthogonal
mirror
condition:
g[m] = ( − 1)m h[1 − m]. Coefficients at different levels are generated by
the following recurrence relation [53]:
∑
cj,k =
hl− 2k cj+1,l
(3)
l

Table 1
Comparison of representative physics-guided constraint methods and their
applicability in tool wear prediction.
Physics-guided
constraints
method

∑

dj,k =

∑
l

gl− 2k cj+1,l

(4)

where cj,k and dj,k are the scaling and wavelet coefficients obtained by
projecting the signal into the space of approximation coefficients and
detail coefficients. l is the length of the signal.
2.1.2. fABBA feature extraction method
STSA’s core mechanism enables symbolic discretization of contin­
uous time series, providing a structured representation of complex
temporal data [54]. On the premise of preserving the key features of the
original sequence, such as trend and period, this approach reduces the
data dimension to support precise predictive maintenance. The purpose
of feature extraction is to extract the information related to the tool wear
and RUL, providing a reliable guarantee for decision-making model.
From this perspective, STSA and feature extraction have the same pur­
pose. In addition, STSA has been widely used in bearing fault diagnosis
[55] and electromechanical equipment condition monitoring [56],
which has been proved to provide a new direction for industrial diag­
nosis. fABBA method based on STSA can be divided into two parts:
adaptive segmentation aggregation and symbolic representation.
1) Adaptive segmentation aggregation
According to local characteristics, the machining signals are
182

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

dynamically divided into segments in the adaptive segmentation ag­
gregation stage. Subsequently, the segmented signal is aggregated into
feature values. Suppose the time series T is divided into n subsegments: T
= [t0 , t1 , …, tN ], Given a compression tolerance threshold tol, By adap­
tively selecting n +1 index points i0 = 0 < i1 < ⋯ < in = N, T = [t0 , t1 ,
…, tN ] is approximated a chain of piecewise linear polygons connected
by these index points. Thus, the time series T is divided into n sub­
)
(
segments: pj = lenj , incj , j = 0, 1, …, N. The length of each subseg­
ment in time direction satisfies lenj ∈ N := ij − ij− 1 ≥ 1. Incremental
meet incj ∈ R := tj − tj− 1 . Starting from i0 = 0, given the indexij− 1 , we
can find the largest possible ij , Meet ij− 1 < ij ≤ N and
∑ij
i=ij− 1

(

)2
) i− i
(
(
)
j− 1
− ti
≤ ij − ij− 1 − 1 ⋅tol2
tij− 1 + tij − tij− 1 ⋅
ij − ij− 1

Table 2
List of features extracted through fABBA.
Mathematical equation

Compression ratio

N
K
K
1 ∑K
l
k=1 k
K
√̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 ∑K
(l − l)2
k=1 k
K
∑
1
K
Δ
k=1 k
K
√̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 ∑K
(Δk − Δk )2
k=1
K
li × Δi (i = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4)

Segment count
Mean of segment length
Standard deviation of segment length
Mean of segmented increments
Standard deviation of segment increments
Product of length and increment

(5)

Based on the above, the time series T = [t0 , t1 , …, tN ] is converted to n
)
(
subsegment: pj = lenj , incj , and the number of segments is controlled
by tol, A lower tol value leads to a better signal representation. At the
same time, this will also impose a computational burden.
2) Symbolic representation
After the adaptive piecewise aggregation of the time series is
completed, fABBA maps the piecewise features into symbolic sequences
through a rank-based aggregation algorithm. Firstly, the segmented
subsequence can be represented as the following tuple:
(
(
)
)
len1 inc1
lenn incn
p1 = scl
,
,
, …, pn = scl
(6)

σlen σ inc

Feature name

change) is denoted as Δk . At the same time, fABBA will cluster these (lk ,
Δk ) to obtain a number of cluster centers. The specific features are
shown in Table 2.
2.2. Physics-based feature enhancement method
2.2.1. Physical model selection
There are many physical models to describe the tool wear process. By
summarizing the relevant literature of the researchers, several classical
physical models are extracted:
1) Extended Taylor’s equation (ETE)
The original Taylor model was proposed by Taylor in 1907, and its
basic form is [10]:

σ len σinc

where σ len and σ inc represent the standard deviation of the tuple's length
and increment, respectively, normalized separately by their standard
deviation before tokenization. scl is the weight used to control the length
and increment.
Following normalization, fABBA uses norm sort or lexicographical
sort for segment ordering. The norm sort makes the neighboring points
have similar global distribution characteristics. While the lexicograph­
ical sort is divided into bins according to the standardized segment
length. And the bins are arranged in incremental ascending order to
adapt to the characteristics of piecewise discretization. Considering that
the cutting signal is non-stationary and nonlinear, the segment length
may vary continuously in dynamic conditions. Strategies based on
lexicographical sorting may lead to information loss or less fine toke­
nization. Therefore, the l 2 norm sort is adopted for fast grouping. This
sorting method integrates the multi-dimensional information of segment
length and increment, and aggregates the segments with similar shape
into symbols, which is suitable for the dynamic feature capture of nonstationary signals.
It is worth noting that, compared with the original ABBA, fABBA uses
the ranking feature to introduce an early termination strategy, and its
core mechanism is based on the following principles:
)
(
When two data points pi and pj satisfy dist pi , pj < α, where α

vc ⋅T m = CT

(8)

where vc is the cutting speed, T is the tool life, m is the material corre­
lation index, CT is the constant related to the workpiece-tool combina­
tion. This model quantifies for the first time the power-law relationship
between cutting speed and tool life.
In order to further accurately represent the process of tool wear, a
variety of Taylor expansion formulas have been proposed, and the
typical expression is [57]:
W = a⋅vb ⋅f c ⋅td

(9)

where W represents the average flank wear, f and t represent the feed
rate and cutting time, and a , b , c and d represent the coefficients
dependent on tool type and workpiece material.
2) Sipos model
Sipos model is another important formula in TWM, and its basic form
is [58]:
)
(
(10)
W = tc • exp A + B⋅tc + C⋅t2c
where, W represents the wear values, tc represents the cutting time, and
A, B, and C are model parameters. This model describes the relationship
between wear and time, and can quickly estimate the flank wear.
3) General wear model with adjustable coefficient:
This model is proposed by Zhu and Zhang, its basic form is [59]:

represents a hyperparameter, the norm difference must be satisfied
⃒
⃒
(
)
⃒
⃒
(7)
⃒|pi | − |pj |⃒ ≤ dist pi , pj ≤ α
This indicates that norm similarity is a necessary but not sufficient
for spatial proximity of data points. Using this feature, efficient clus­
tering is achieved by incremental neighborhood search after norm
ranking. That is, from the current point pi , Simply iterate over all the
subsequent points in the sorted sequence that satisfy ‖ pk ‖≤‖ pi ‖ + α.
Once the first ‖ pk ‖>‖ pi ‖ +α is detected, the early termination condi­
tion can be triggered in advance to avoid redundant distance calculation
for subsequent points. Based on the fABBA method, the feature extrac­
tion to characterize the tool wear state is carried out. Suppose that the

W = a⋅In(b⋅t + 1) + c⋅t 3

(11)

where W represents the flank wear values, t represents the time, and a, b
and c are the adjustable coefficients of the model. This physical model
has the advantages of simple structure and high accuracy [60].
In Section 3.1, the corresponding performance comparison of the
above physical models is carried out to determine the best physical
model.

time series after multi-scale signal is X = {xt }Nt=1 , after fABBA segmen­
tation, a total of K segments are obtained, the length of the k segment is
denoted as lk , and the corresponding increment (or slope/amplitude

2.2.2. Parameter fitting
The nonlinear least-squares method is used to fit the parameters of
the physical model. The formula is as follows:
183

S. Jiang et al.

SSR =

∑n
i=1

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

(WTure − WFitted )2

generated by alternately populating sine and cosine values at different
frequencies, which compensates for the alignment invariance of the selfattention mechanism. As a result, the model can efficiently process
sequential data and achieve improved performance.

(12)

where SSR represents the sum of squared residuals, WTure represents the
actual values of tool wear, and n is the total number of tool wear labels.
WFitted are the fitted values.
The purpose of the nonlinear least-squares method is to minimize the
sum of squared differences between the fitted and actual values of the
model, thereby establishing a reliable benchmark prediction curve. In
the above two steps, the wear data in the training set and validation set
were used to determine the parameters of the physical model. Subse­
quently, the parameterized physical model was used to generate a wear
evolution curve. It is worth noting that this curve is directly produced by
the physical model. It conforms to established physical wear rate prin­
ciples. Specifically, wear value increases monotonically with time or
cutting cycles, and the wear rate exhibits stage-dependent variations
across the initial, normal, and severe wear stages.

2.3.2. Historical information embedding
Temporal causality is critical for multi-step prediction. Precise
modeling of tool wear and RUL values versus historical information can
provide more accurate prediction results. First, the history of both can be
represented as a two-dimensional matrix: X ∈ RN×L , where N is the
number of predictor variables and L is the length of predictor variables.
Subsequently, L is unfolded at equal intervals according to a fixed size P,
which is expressed as follows:
Xpatch = unfold (X, size = P, stride = P)

(14)

Through this step, each sample, the historical sequence of each
variable is cut into L/P local subsequences. The length of each patch is P.
The benefits of this are obvious. It not only reduces the computational
complexity of global self-attention, but also makes it easier to capture
local information in each local window of length P through the seg­
mentation operation.
After unfolding, each patch is mapped to a high-dimensional space
with dimension dmodel through a linear layer. Subsequently, the posi­
tional encoding is added to it, and a learnable vector is assigned to each
variable: gn ∈ Rdmodel , is assigned to each variable as a global token.
Finally, the position encoding is concatenated with the global token:
)
(
(15)
∈ R2dmodel
Zout = Concat Zpos , gn

2.3. Transformer-based multi-step prediction model
The constructed Transformer-based multi-step prediction model is
shown in Fig. 2. This model consists of five main components: positional
coding embedding; feature embedding; historical information embed­
ding; attention coding architecture; and feedforward and residual
connection layer.
2.3.1. Positional coding embedding
The original Transformer model lacks time-series comprehension, so
it requires explicit position encoding to inject position information into
the sequence. For the time series data of the tool wear, the component
generates a position encoding matrix using the sine/cosine function. For
each position p and dimension index i, the encoding is calculated as:
⎧
(
)
⎪
pos
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨ PE(pos,2i) = sin 100002i/dmodel
(13)
(
)
⎪
pos
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩ PE(pos,2i+1) = cos 100002i/dmodel

where, Zpos represents the high-dimensional vector for position encod­
ing, and gn represents the global token corresponding to each variable.
2.3.3. Feature embedding
The feature embedding representation module linearly combines the
features through a learnable weight matrix. Therefore, the highdimensional embedding vector of each feature can characterize its
evolution pattern across the entire sequence. Its mathematical expres­
sion is as follows:

where pos denotes the position index, dmodel denotes the embedding
dimension, and i denotes the dimension index. 10000 is a hyper­
parameter to control the wavelength. Multiscale positional coding is

Z = X⋅wT

(16)

Fig. 2. The constructed Transformer model based on multi-head self-attention mechanism and cross-attention mechanism for multi-step prediction of tool wear
and RUL.
184

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

normalization. Finally, the updated global features are passed back to
the main network to participate in feedforward computation.

where X ∈ RL×N , denotes the input feature sequence data; w ∈ Rdmodel ×L is
the weight matrix that maps time steps to higher dimensions. The output
Z ∈ Rdmodel ×N is the high-dimensional embedding representation of the
features.

2.3.5. Feedforward and residual connection
In this model, the feedforward network adopts 1D convolution
instead of the fully connected layer used in traditional Transformer to
enhance the nonlinear fitting capability by expanding the hidden layer
dimension. It consists of two levels of 1D convolution with a nonlinear
activation function. Its formula can be represented as:

2.3.4. Attention coding architecture
The attention mechanism is an important part of the Transformer. In
this model, multi-head self-attention is used to capture the temporal
dependencies inherent in the prediction target. Cross-attention captures
dependencies between different features relevant to the prediction
target.
1) Multi-head self-attention mechanism
The main framework of the multi-head self-attention mechanism is
shown in Fig. 3.
Assume that the input sequence is MX ∈ RL×dmodel . First, three sets of
linear mappings are applied to MX to obtain query vector Q = MX WQ ,
key vector K = MX WK , value vector V = MX WV , respectively, where WQ ,
WK , WV ∈ Rdmodel ×dmodel . Setting the number of attention heads to H
will divide the dmodel equally among each head. Scaled dot product
attention is then performed separately for each head:
( T)
QK
(17)
Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax √̅̅̅̅ V
dk
√̅̅̅̅
where Q, K, V ∈ Rdmodel , dk is the normalization factor, which is
used to address the numerical instability caused by large dot product
values. Then, concatenate the outputs of each head along the dimension:
MultiHead(Q, K, V) = Concat(head1 , …, headh )WO

FFN (X) = LayerNorm(X + F(X) )

(20)

where F(⋅) denotes the composite transformation of ascending,
activating and descending dimensions.
The nonlinear activation function uses the ReLU or GELU activation
function to enhance the nonlinear representation, and the discard layer
is used to randomly dropout some neurons to suppress overfitting.
The residual connection adopts cross-layer skip connections with
layer normalization to solve the problem of vanishing gradients. The
addition of layer normalization ensures the stability of the data distri­
bution. After residual connection, the outputs of the multi-head selfattention layer, cross attention layer and the feedforward layer are
calculated respectively according to the following formulas:
XMH = LayerNorm(X + Dropout(MultiHeadSelfAttention(X) ) )

(21)

)))
(
XCA = LayerNorm XMH + Dropout CrossAttention xgbl , XMH

(22)

XFFN = LayerNorm(XCA + Dropout(FFN(XCA ) ) )

(23)

(

(18)

(

where LayerNorm represents layer normalization operation, Dropout
represents random dropping.

where WO ∈ Rdmodel ×dmodel is used to map the concatenated results
of all heads back to a unified dimension.
2) Cross-attention mechanism
Unlike the multi-head self-attention mechanism, the cross-attention
mechanism takes the real-time state as the query vector, and extracts
the corresponding keys and values from the features. First, the end time
step x ∈ RL×dmodel is extracted from the self-attention output xgbl ∈ Rdmodel
as a global representation of the tool current state, and to compute its
relationship with the feature matrix:
( T)
QK
(19)
CrossAttention(X1 , X2 ) = Softmax √̅̅̅̅̅ V
d2

2.4. Hard-soft physical constraints
Due to the cumulative effect of wear, tool wear values should remain
strictly monotonically increasing, while the RUL values should remain
strictly monotonically decreasing. However, traditional data-driven
models lack physical constraints, which can lead to outputs that
violate physical laws, such as oscillatory decreases in wear values or
unexpected increases in RUL values. To address this problem, this study
proposes a physical knowledge embedding module that integrates hardsoft constraints, as shown in Fig. 4. Specifically, we ensure that the
model’s output does not violate the fundamental physical laws by
imposing strict constraints. Meanwhile, adaptive multi-task optimiza­
tion is employed to implicitly constrain of tool wear and RUL values,
forming a hierarchical and progressive output that adheres to physical
principles. It is worth noting that the physics-based model is a semi-

where X1 denotes the global representation of the tool current state,
and X2 denotes the feature matrix, which is mapped to keys and values
using the projection matrices WK and WV .
Subsequently, the information fusion between the features and the
prediction target is achieved through a residual connection and layer

Fig. 3. Multi-head self-attention mechanism architecture. (a) scaled dot-product attention. (b) multi-head attention.
185

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

function can be employed to realize an effective soft constraint between
these prediction results.
In this study, a multi-task loss function with homoscedastic uncer­
tainty weighting is employed. Firstly, in order to model the inherent
uncertainty of tasks, the observation noise parameter is introduced. The
errors of wear and RUL prediction tasks are treated as gaussian distri­
butions with zero mean and variance σ2i :
)
(
)
(
(26)
p yi |fW (x) = N yi ; fW (x), σ 2i
where yi represents the true values of the task, and fW (x) represents the
model's predicted output. Subsequently, a Gaussian likelihood is estab­
lished for the tool wear and RUL prediction task, and the negative loglikelihood is taken to obtain the loss function with variance terms:
L (W, σ1 , σ2 ) =

1
1
L1 (W) + 2 L2 (W) + logσ1 + logσ 2
2σ21
2σ 2

(27)

where Li (W) = |yi − fW (x)|2 . To ensure numerical stability, a variance
parameter si = logσ 2i is introduced, and the final trainable loss function
can be expressed as:
)
∑2 (1
1
L (W, s1 , s2 ) =
e− si Li (W) + si
(28)
i=1 2
2
where e− si represents the adaptive weight, which is used to dynamically
adjust the contribution of the loss to the prediction of tool wear and RUL.
si represents the task-related uncertainty, which is automatically learned
from the data.
By employing a multi-task loss with homoscedastic uncertainty
weighting, the relative contributions of the tool wear and RUL tasks are
learned automatically. This approach avoids the tediousness and
subjectivity of manual hyperparameter tuning, effectively achieving
dynamic balance and stable joint training of the two tasks.

Fig. 4. The proposed hard-soft physical knowledge embedding module. In this
case, the methods of constructing hard physical constraints and soft physical
constraint as well as constraint process of the Mechanism are described.

empirical constraint that applies physical laws at the model output,
resulting in a monotonically increasing trend for the wear value and a
monotonically decreasing trend for the RUL.
2.4.1. Hard physical constraint
For the monotonicity requirement of tool wear and RUL, this study
designs a bidirectional-chained constraint. Wear prediction achieves
strict temporal monotonic increase through non-negative incremental
constraints, mathematically represented as:
∑t
)
(
(0)
(24)
y(t)
max Δy(k) , ϵ1
0 = y0 +

3. Dataset for multi-step prediction model
3.1. Case 1: PHM2010
3.1.1. Experiment introduction
The PHM2010 public dataset was used to validate the proposed
method. This dataset is one of the most frequently used datasets in the
tool wear and prediction [62]. The experimental data collection process
is illustrated in Fig. 5.
These milling experiments were performed on a Rüoders Tech
RFM760 machining center, and stainless-steel workpieces were
machined under dry conditions with three-flute carbide ball-end milling
tools. The experiments were designated C1 to C6. Each group was
stopped after 315 consecutive cuts. Three of the datasets containing
wear labels (C1, C4, and C6) are used in this study.
Consistent machining parameters were maintained throughout the
machining process, as shown in Table 3. One Kistler dynamometer and
three Kistler piezoelectric accelerometers were used to collect force and
acceleration signals in the X, Y and Z directions. A Kistler acoustic
emission sensor was used to collect the AE signals. A DAQ NI PCI 1200
acquisition card was used to capture these signals at a sampling rate of
50 kHz.
This dataset uses a LEICA MZ12 microscope to record the wear
values of three cutting edges of the tool. It is worth noting that the tool
average wear value is used as the criterion for dividing wear stages in
this study. This choice is based on the following considerations. Firstly,
during the machining process, multiple cutting edges of the tool usually
jointly participate in the cutting machining, the average wear value
provides a more comprehensive representation of the overall tool
health. In addition, in practical measurements, individual edges may
exhibit abnormal wear values due to built-up edge or measurement er­
rors. Choosing the average wear value helps to eliminate such occasional

k=1

where ϵ1 corresponds to the minimum wear step, avoiding the physical

contradiction of zero or positively increasing degradation rates. y0

(0)

(t)
denotes the current wear value, and y0 denotes the next wear value. For

RUL prediction, this study utilizes an inverse accumulation strategy to
enforce monotonic decrease, mathematically represented as:
∑t
)
(
(0)
(25)
y1 = y1 −
max Δy(k) , ϵ2
k=1

where ϵ2 denotes the minimum lifetime loss step.
2.4.2. Soft physical constraint
Tool wear and RUL are essentially two complementary perspectives
that characterize tool degradation process, relying on largely shared
information. The multi-task loss function enables the model to learn a
universal degradation process within largely shared information,
significantly enhancing feature representation capability and general­
izability [61]. Meanwhile, this method forms an implicit attention
mechanism for key physical degradation features. Compared to strictly
physics-guided loss functions, the multi-task loss function shows stron­
ger adaptability and flexibility in in complex machining. This is because
it only requires establishing the connection between tool wear and RUL.
More importantly, the multi-task loss function naturally constricts the
physical consistency between wear and RUL predictions through the
joint optimization process. For example, larger wear values must
correspond to shorter remaining life. Therefore, the multi-task loss
186

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Fig. 5. Signal acquisition and tool wear measurement platform during milling machining of PHM2010 dataset. (a) Placement positions of accelerometers, dyna­
mometer and acoustic emission sensors during the machining. (b) Hardware and software systems for signals acquisition. (c) Tool wear measurement equipment.

complete and valid signal during a single milling. Meanwhile, since the
windows are non-overlapping, the stride parameter was not set.
In addition, considering the multi-channel signals such as cutting
force and vibration have significantly different units and dynamic
ranges, direct normalization in the raw signal domain may disrupt the
physical correlations between channels. Therefore, to preserve the
physical interpretability of the signals, Z-score standardization is per­
formed after feature extraction to prevent gradient explosion and
accelerate model convergence.
In this study, a three-level discrete wavelet transform (DWT) was
employed to achieve multi-scale signal analysis, where the Daubechies 4
(DB4) wavelet was selected as the basis function and the decomposition
level was set to 3. In the subsequent feature extraction process, only the
low-frequency approximation component and the level-3 high-fre­
quency detail component were utilized. Taking advantage of the
inherent low-pass filtering characteristics of wavelet decomposition,
each decomposition level applied a high-order filter prior to downsampling to achieve anti-aliasing, thereby ensuring the spectral integ­
rity of the decomposed signals.
Subsequently, features are extracted from the multiscale decom­
posed signals using the fABBA method described in Section 2.1.2. Based
on the known data, physics-based feature enhancement approach pro­
posed in Section 2.2 is used to establish the benchmark curve of wear
behavior for unknown conditions. To apply this method to the PHM2010
dataset, a physical model fitting scheme is designed, as shown in
Table 5. Furthermore, the coefficient of determination (R²) is used for
quantitative evaluation to determine the best physical model. Table 6

Table 3
Cutting parameters for PHM2010 dataset.
Parameter

Value

Cut in the axial direction
Cut in the radial direction
Feed rate
Spindle speed

0.2 mm
0.125 mm
1555 mm/min
10,400 rpm

abnormal situations and provides a more stable wear indicator. Addi­
tionally, following the method in reference [63], the expectation
maximization (EM) algorithm is used to classify the wear stages. Table 4
presents the complete division results of the wear stages and the cor­
responding thresholds. The visualization results are presented in Fig. 6.
3.1.2. Data preprocessing
The signals collected during the milling are first subjected to multi­
scale decomposition using the methods described in Section 2.1. Fig. 7
shows the results of the multiscale decomposition of the X-axis cutting
force signals with the 32nd cut in C1.
In PHM2010 dataset, the collected signals during the milling are first
subjected to preprocessing. The workpiece utilized in the PHM2010
dataset was a stainless-steel block measuring 108 mm in length along
the tool feed direction. The tool paused briefly after each 108 mm
milling pass to record the signals and wear values, and this process was
repeated to obtain a total of 315 samples. Notably, the samples are in­
dependent. Therefore, in this study, the selected window length was the
Table 4
Partition and threshold of C1, C4, and C6 groups in PHM2010 dataset.
Group

Initial wear

Threshold (10− 3mm)

Normal wear

Threshold (10− 3mm)

Severe wear

Threshold (10− 3mm)

C1
C4
C6

1–47
1–135
1–81

86.50799
94.53765
106.89404

48–146
136–204
82–188

98.84205
96.06208
125.56267

147–315
205–315
189–315

165.17241
203.07792
215.94224

Fig. 6. The wear value of each flute, average wear values and wear stage divisions of three tools in the PHM2010 dataset. (a) - (c) C1, C4, C6 group.
187

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Table 7
Physical models fitting performance on the PHM2010 Dataset.

Table 5
Physical model fitting scheme configuration for PHM2010
dataset.
Target unknown group

C1 C4
C4 C6
C1 C6

C6
C1
C4

parameters

values

C1

a
b
c
d
a
b
c
d
a
b
c
d

1.2136 ± 0.1747
624.04 ± 0.41215
(3.7684 ± 0.2213) × 10− 8
-63.252 ± 21.202
13.739 ± 1.927
2.4454 ± 32.109
(3.0584 ± 0.2007) × 10− 8
1.0532 ± 171.55
10.714 ± 0.91674
561.19 ± 0.21041
(3.1071 ± 0.11718) × 10− 8
-50.426 ± 11.026

C4

C6

Fitted
groups

Target
group

Generalized wear model with
adjustable coefficients

Sipos

ETE

C1 C4
C4 C6
C1 C6

C6
C1
C4

0.9328
0.8474
0.8677

0.7727
0.7043
0.7511

0.8991
0.8219
0.7995

RUL(i) = If − i

(29)

where If denotes the total number of cutting operations for the tool, and i
represents the current cutting operation. For PHM2010 dataset, detailed
tool failure thresholds are listed in Table 9. Furthermore, the relation­
ship between the tool wear value and the RUL value in the PHM2010
dataset is depicted in Fig. 11.

Table 6
Applicable parameter range of the generalized wear model for the PHM2010
dataset (95 % Confidence Level).
Test set

Physics models (R²)

validation, and test data but also enhances the model’s generalization
capability. The detailed training configuration is shown in Table 8.
In tool wear and RUL experiments, even tools from the same batch
may exhibit different wear evolution trends due to manufacturing
variability, clamping errors, fluctuations in cutting conditions, and the
inherent randomness of the wear process. Considering these factors, the
RUL of the tool in this study is defined based on the actual machining
process rather than a fixed threshold, as illustrated in Fig. 10.
This definition method allows adaptation to the individual differ­
ences among different tools and ensures the completeness of the
degradation process. Therefore, it has been widely adopted on tool RUL
prediction [64–66]. The RUL can be expressed as:

Fig. 7. Multiscale decomposition results of the X-axis cutting force signals of
the 32nd cuts of C1. (a) Original Signals. (b) Level 1 Detail Coefficient. (c) Level
2 Detail Coefficient. (d) Level 3 Detail Coefficient. (e) Level 3 Approxima­
tion Coefficient.

Known groups

Group settings

3.2. Case 2: Self-constructed dataset
3.2.1. Experimental introduction
It is worth noting that the self-constructed dataset and the PHM2010
dataset are completely independent in terms of data sources, experi­
mental design, and training, validation, and testing procedures. The
conclusions from the two experiments are independently established
and do not depend on each other. The PHM2010 dataset offers a way to
verify tool wear with constant cutting parameters. To further validate
the effectiveness and generalization of the proposed method, this study
specifically designed three-axis milling experiments in dry operation
with three combinations of cutting parameters, as shown in Table 10.
All the experiments were conducted on a HAAS VF-3 machining
center, as shown in Fig. 10c. In each experiment, a fresh ball-end tool
with a diameter of 12 mm with two flutes was used. The workpiece in
the experiment was made of Ti-6Al-4V (TC4). This material has high
tensile strength, low in density, and has excellent thermal stability,
which makes it a key material in many high-end industrial fields.
Meanwhile, this material maintains excellent tensile strength and fa­
tigue resistance in high-temperature or corrosive environments. How­
ever, due to its poor thermal conductivity, the heat generated during the
cutting process cannot dissipate quickly. This causes the tools to with­
stand increased cutting heat and cutting forces, which leads to a
degradation in the workpiece’s surface roughness and dimensional ac­
curacy.. Therefore, titanium alloy TC4 is designated as the workpiece
material in tool wear experiments, whose chemical composition is listed
in Table 11. The dimensions of the workpiece are 80 mm × 30 mm
× 30 mm.
In the experiments, the data acquisition platform is shown in Fig. 12.
The acquisition process can be divided into two parts: signal acquisition
and wear label acquisition. The signal acquisition uses a dynamometer
(FC-K3D120), a accelerometer (WA0122D-100), and an acoustic emis­
sion (AE) sensor (PXR50) to collect signals during the machining pro­
cess. The dynamometer collects data at a sampling frequency of 5 kHz. A
three-axis piezoelectric accelerometer is fixed to the machine tool

presents the detailed parameter ranges of the generalized wear model
with adjustable coefficients at the 95 % confidence level.
The complete results obtained for the three physical models are
shown in Table 7. As can be seen, the generalized wear model with
adjustable coefficients demonstrates optimal performance. The perfor­
mance of this model in each data sample is shown in Fig. 8.
In addition, the model output curves against the actual observed data
for each data split have been shown in Fig. 9. It is worth noting that the
wear model parameters were fitted using only the training and valida­
tion sets, without any data from the test set. This ensures the reliability
of subsequent evaluations on the test set.
After the above steps, the feature sets representing tool wear and
RUL for C1, C4 and C6 are constructed for model training. Compared
with the traditional feature engineering relying on manual expertise,
this feature extraction method does not require manual selection, and
avoids the problem of implicit loss of information in the degradation
process to some extent. Specifically, we use two groups with complete
wear stages in the PHM2010 dataset as the training and validation sets
to predict another group with a complete wear stage as the test set. This
splitting strategy not only ensures the independence of training,
188

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

S. Jiang et al.

Fig. 8. The fitting results of different groups in the PHM2010 dataset are obtained using the generalized wear model with adjustable coefficients. (a) The fitting
results of C1 and C4 as the fitting group. (b) The fitting results of C4 and C6 as the fitting group. (c) The fitting results of C1 and C6 as the fitting group.

Fig. 9. The fitted values and actual values of different groups in the PHM2010 dataset are obtained using the generalized wear model with adjustable coefficients: (a)
- (c) C1, C4 and C6.

spindle. It is integrated with an NI-9234 acquisition card and visuali­
zation software for capturing signals at a sampling frequency of
10.24 kHz. The AE sensor uses the PXDAQ24260 V2.0 acquisition sys­
tem at a sampling frequency of 78.125 kHz.
Wear labels were obtained using a digital microscope (AO-21TZ).
Fig. 13 presents machining path, the measurement position, and the
flank wear images of the tool after different numbers of cutting opera­
tions. Wear condition I shows the surface of a new tool before cutting.
Wear condition II corresponds to a flank wear (VB) value of 26.804 μm.
As the number of cutting operations increases, the flank wear region
expands progressively. Wear condition III reaches a VB value of 48.628
μm, and further increases in cutting lead to wear condition IV, where the
VB value reaches 124.749 μm. The criteria for splitting the training,
validation, and test sets are consistent with those of the PHM2010
dataset, and the detailed training configuration is presented in Table 12.
For self-constructed dataset, the method for defining the RUL of the
cutting tool is consistent with the PHM2010 dataset, detailed tool failure
thresholds are listed in Table 13.
In addition, similar to the PHM2010 dataset, the EM algorithm was
employed to determine the tool wear stage and the corresponding
threshold. The complete results are presented in Table 14.

Table 8
The configuration of training, validation and test sets of PHM2010 dataset.
Training set

Validation set

Test set

C4
C6
C1

C6
C1
C4

C1
C4
C6

Fig. 10. Schematic diagram of tool RUL prediction principle.

3.2.2. Data preprocessing
Consistent with the PHM2010 dataset, the self-constructed dataset
also employs DWT for multi-scale signal preprocessing. In particular, the
DB4 is used as the wavelet basis function, and the decomposition level
was set to 3. The low-frequency approximation component and the
level-3 high-frequency detail component were retained for feature
extraction. Subsequently, feature extraction is performed using the
fABBA method. At the same time, a physics-enhanced feature is
obtained.
In addition, to enable the prediction model to fully capture temporal

Table 9
The wear failure thresholds of groups C1, C4 and C6 in the
PHM2010 dataset.
Group

Tool failure thresholds (10− 3mm)

C1
C4
C6

165.17241
203.07792
215.94224

189

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Fig. 11. The consistency relationship between the tool wear and the RUL value in the PHM2010 dataset. (a) – (c) C1 group, C4 group and C6 group.

13th generation Intel Core i9–14900K at 3.20 GHz. The software version
used was PyCharm 2025.2.4 (Professional). The construction and
training of the model was done based on the PyTorch framework. In
addition, L2 regularization was combined with an early stopping
mechanism to suppress overfitting. Model hyperparameters govern
learning dynamics and architecture, directly determining performance
and generalizability. To maximize the generalization capability of pro­
posed model, Bayesian optimization was employed to automatically
tune the hyperparameters. This method is widely used in deep learning
[68–70]. It can efficiently explore the hyperparameter space using
limited computational resources and identify parameter combinations
that achieve superior performance. The optimized hyperparameters and
their corresponding search ranges are summarized in Table 17. During
training, the Adam optimizer was employed, with the mean squared
error (MSE) used as the loss function and a batch size of 128.

Table 10
Cutting parameter combinations for three-axis milling experiments.
Test sets

Cutting speed (m/min)

Spindle speed (r/min)

Cutting depth (mm)

T1
T2
T3

380
340
340

3400
3600
3400

1
1
1

Table 11
Chemical composition (wt%) of Ti6Al4V.
C

O

Fe

H

N

AI

V

Ti

0.013

0.152

0.13

0.0012

0.017

6.08

4.05

Bal.

characteristics, a Piecewise Cubic Hermite Interpolating Polynomial
(PCHIP) method was used to expand the wear values. This method uses
piecewise cubic polynomials to construct interpolated data. Each poly­
nomial segment depends only on the adjacent data points. This method
effectively avoids unrealistic oscillations near the data points while
preserving the sequence's monotonicity, making it applicable to signal
processing and numerical analysis [67]. The original wear values and
the corresponding interpolation results are shown in Fig. 14.
Consistent with the PHM2010 dataset, Table 15 presents the detailed
parameter ranges of the generalized wear model with adjustable co­
efficients at the 95 % confidence level.
Consistent with the method used on the PHM2010 dataset, the
physics model output curves against the actual observed data for each
data split in self-constructed dataset has been shown in Fig. 15.

4.1. PHM2010
4.1.1. Performance experiment
In order to systematically evaluate the predictive ability of the pro­
posed model under different time steps, this section sets four different
prediction time steps: 12, 24, 36, and 48. Furthermore, the model's
performance is examined across different wear stages. In this study, a
sliding window with a stride of one is employed to maximize preser­
vation of temporal dependencies in cutting signals. To reduce the
volatility of individual predictions and improve overall stability, the
multiple predictions over the same time step are averaged. This is a
common technique in time series prediction [71,72]. In particular, the
monotonicity of each single-shot prediction is guaranteed by the
designed physical hard constraints. However, due to the differences in
the initial value and growth rate of each sample, its average curve may
still show transient non-monotonic fluctuations. This does not invalidate
the constraints; it merely reflects the characteristics of aggregated to
group statistics.
The wear prediction results of C1 are shown in Fig. 16. It can be seen
that the proposed method exhibits stage differences in tool full-cycle
wear prediction. Specifically, in the initial and severe wear stages, the
model shows excellent predictive accuracy at different steps (12, 24, 36,
and 48), which can accurately capture the wear change trend. However,
in the normal stage, the prediction accuracy of the model slightly de­
creases. Meanwhile, as the prediction step increases, the model's ability
to predict wear in the normal stage further weakens. This phenomenon
occurs because when the tool enters the normal wear stage, the cutting
signals gradually stabilize. Meanwhile, during this stage, wear increases
only minimally, and in some samples remains unchanged. In contrast, in

3.3. Performance evaluation metrics
In this study, the mean absolute error (MAE), root mean square error
(RMSE) and coefficient of determination (R2) are employed to system­
atically evaluate the prediction performance. The mathematical defini­
tions are shown in Table 16. Among these evaluation metrics, the
smaller the values of MAE, RMSE, the higher the corresponding pre­
diction accuracy. while an R2 value closer to 1 suggests a higher degree
of agreement between the predicted and actual values. These evaluation
metrics all come from test sets.
4. Experimental validation and result analysis
A computer equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 4060 graphics card and
CUDA 12.6.4 version was used for these experiments.. The CPU was a

190

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Fig. 12. Three-axis milling of Ti6Al4V titanium alloy and tool wear measurement experiment. (a) The placement locations of dynamometer, accelerometer and
acoustic emission sensor. (b) Tool wear measurement platform. (c) Data acquisition system for machining signals.

the initial and severe wear stages, the wear rate rises rapidly, accom­
panied by significant signal changes. Therefore, it provides rich feature
information for the model to accurately predict the wear.
As the prediction step increases, the errors of single point prediction
method exhibit a cumulative effect, resulting in a higher risk of devia­
tion in the long-term degradation trajectory. In contrast, interval pre­
diction provides confidence ranges for prediction results by quantifying
the uncertainty of model outputs. Therefore, in order to further evaluate

the performance of the proposed method under different prediction
steps, the interval prediction method based on Bootstrap is employed
[73,74]. In order to eliminate the impact of random fluctuations, 30
independent repeated experiments are conducted, and the average value
is calculated at a confidence level of 95 %. Meanwhile, Prediction In­
terval Coverage Probability (PICP) and Prediction Interval Normalized
Average Width (PINAW) are adopted to quantitatively evaluate the
uncertainty of predictions.

191

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Fig. 13. Schematic of ball-end milling machining and corresponding wear observations. (a) Milling path of the ball-end tool. (b) Measurement of the wear value
position of the ball-end tool. (c) - (f) The ball-end tool wear conditions.

as:

Table 12
The configuration of training, validation and test sets of self-constructed dataset.
Training set

Validation set

Test set

T1
T2
T3

T2
T3
T1

T3
T1
T2

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨

⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
Count i =
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩

Table 13
The wear failure thresholds of groups C1, C4 and C6 in the selfconstructed dataset.
Groups

Tool failure thresholds (10− 3mm)

T1
T2
T3

311.195
332.289
311.421

PICP =
{

1 ∑N
Counti
N i=1

1

Pi

∈

[Li , Hi ]

0

Pi

∕
∈

[Li , Hi ]

(30)

where N is the total number of test samples, Pi is the true (observed)
value for the i-th sample, Li and Hi are, the lower and upper bounds of
the predicted interval for the i-th sample respectively. Count i is an in­
dicator that equals 1 if the true value Pi falls within its prediction
interval[Li , Hi ], and 0 otherwise.
Ideally, the PICP should approach the preset confidence level. And
PINAW quantifies the compactness of the interval width, which is
mathematically defined as:

PICP represents the proportion of true values falling within the
prediction interval. It is used to measure the extent to which the pre­
diction interval covers the true values, which is mathematically defined

PINAW =

1 ∑N
(Hi − Li )
NT i=1

(31)

Table 14
Partition and threshold of T1, T2, and T3 groups in self-constructed dataset.
Groups

Initial wear

Threshold (10− 3mm)

Normal wear

Threshold (10− 3mm)

Severe wear

Threshold (10− 3mm)

T1
T2
T3

1–111
1–98
1–114

139.37
145.135
124.774

112–233
99–179
115–219

226.188
230.734
209.626

234–299
180–297
220–300

311.195
332.289
311.421

192

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Fig. 14. Tool wear curves of the ball-end tools under different machining conditions. (a) The average wear value change curves of T1, T2, and T3 during the
machining. (b) - (d) Average tool wear curves for T1–T3 after interpolated by PCHIP interpolation.

presented in Table 18.
As shown in Table 8, the PICP values in all cases are close to the
predefined 95 % confidence level, indicating that the prediction in­
tervals effectively cover the true values. From the evaluation results of
different prediction steps, 12-step prediction shows the best perfor­
mance, which verifies the high accuracy of the proposed method in
short-term prediction. As the prediction step increases, the PINAW of all
cases except C6 exhibit an upward trend. From the evaluation results of
different wear stages, the PINAW values in the normal wear stage are
higher than those in the initial wear and severe wear stages, which is

Table 15
Applicable Parameter Range of the Generalized Wear Model for the selfconstructed dataset (95 % Confidence Level).
Test set

parameters

values

T1

a
b
c
d
a
b
c
d
a
b
c
d

82068 ± 0.0000010241
(5.1002 ± 0.043183) × 10− 7
(7.4521 ± 11.143) × 10− 11
58.816 ± 6.2417
38.165 ± 2.5599
(8.8470 ± 3.4071) × 10− 3
(7.7273 ± 0.19979) × 10− 10
9.2175 ± 7.7994
407.93 ± 0.05988
(1.3944 ± 0.096008) × 10− 4
(9.8578 ± 6.8371) × 10− 11
51.351 ± 5.3964

T2

T3

Table 16
Evaluation metrics and mathematical expressions.
Evaluation metric
RMSE
MAE

where T is the range of tool wear values. A smaller value indicates a
narrower average width of the prediction interval and higher accuracy
within the uncertainty bounds. The complete wear prediction results are

R2

Equation
√̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
1 ∑n
(Prei − Acti )2
i=1
n
1 ∑n
MAE =
|Prei − Acti |
i=1
n
∑n
2
(Act
i − Prei )
R2 = 1 − ∑i=1
n
2
i=1 (Acti − Act)

RMSE =

Fig. 15. The fitted values and actual values of different groups in the self-constructed dataset are obtained using the generalized wear model with adjustable co­
efficients: (a) - (c) C1, C4 and C6.
193

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

high coverage and narrow interval width strongly demonstrates the
accurate prediction ability of the model for nonlinear abrupt wear in the
severe wear stage. In summary, this method shows excellent prediction
performance in 12, 24, 36, and 48 steps.
Table 19 presents the PICP and PINAW values of the tool RUL at
different wear stages. Compared with the results of tool wear prediction,
the results of RUL prediction are superior. Most of the prediction results
slightly decrease with the increase of step. It is worth noting that, in
contrast to the tool wear prediction, the RUL prediction in the normal
wear stage is better than wear prediction in the same stage. The values of
PINAW are between 0.0002 and 0.0068. Overall, the proposed method
can accurately predict RUL at 12, 24, 36, and 48 steps.

Table 17
Hyperparameters and search ranges used in Bayesian optimization.
Parameter

Search Range

Model dimension
Patch size
Number of attention heads
Feedforward neural network dimension
Number of encoder layers
Initial Learning Rate
Weight decay

[128, 256, 512]
[1,5]
[2,8]
[512, 1024, 2048]
[2,4]
[1 × 10⁻⁵, 5 × 10⁻⁴]
[1 × 10⁻⁶, 1 × 10⁻³ ]

consistent with the visualization results in Fig. 16. It is worth noting that
the model's performance indicators reach their best level in the severe
wear stage, with the PICP values ranging from 95.2 % to 95.77 % and
the PINAW values ranging from 0.0105 to 0.1246. This combination of

4.1.2. Comparison experiment
To further validate the performance advantages of the proposed

Fig. 16. Performance evaluation on the C1 test set for different prediction steps and wear stages using the proposed method.
194

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Table 18
Evaluation results of interval prediction for wear across different wear stages and prediction steps.
Case

Steps

C1

12
24
36
48
12
24
36
48
12
24
36
48

C4

C6

Initial wear

Normal wear

Severe wear

PICP

PINAW

PICP

PINAW

PICP

PINAW

98.20 %
97.84 %
97.21 %
97.21 %
95.47 %
95.41 %
95.55 %
95.63 %
96.20 %
95.82 %
96.43 %
96.57 %

0.0639
0.1507
0.1505
0.3394
0.1280
0.2364
0.2883
0.3486
0.2258
0.3211
0.3191
0.2578

95.79 %
95.89 %
95.93 %
95.69 %
96.47 %
96.47 %
96.47 %
96.33 %
95.86 %
95.73 %
95.86 %
95.86 %

0.1262
0.3449
0.5680
0.8071
0.5254
1.1837
2.2989
2.5732
0.0720
0.1365
0.2038
0.2490

95.60 %
95.72 %
95.40 %
95.50 %
95.53 %
95.65 %
95.65 %
95.77 %
95.49 %
95.20 %
95.49 %
95.70 %

0.0105
0.0338
0.0358
0.0745
0.0123
0.0290
0.0426
0.1033
0.0262
0.0347
0.0697
0.1246

Table 19
Evaluation results of interval prediction for RUL across different wear stages and prediction steps.
Case
C1

C4

C6

Steps
12
24
36
48
12
24
36
48
12
24
36
48

Initial wear

Normal wear

Severe wear

PICP

PINAW

PICP

PINAW

PICP

PINAW

99.28 %
99.28 %
98.65 %
98.83 %
97.76 %
97.73 %
97.79 %
97.79 %
98.12 %
98.22 %
98.22 %
98.22 %

0.0291
0.0366
0.0932
0.1920
0.0071
0.0052
0.0083
0.0165
0.0098
0.0336
0.0314
0.0342

97.98 %
97.91 %
97.95 %
97.85 %
98.16 %
98.16 %
98.16 %
98.02 %
97.88 %
97.94 %
97.91 %
97.94 %

0.0002
0.0022
0.0068
0.0041
0.0009
0.0008
0.0029
0.0015
0.0004
0.0007
0.0007
0.0042

97.75 %
97.65 %
97.61 %
97.77 %
97.90 %
97.90 %
97.84 %
97.93 %
97.74 %
97.77 %
97.80 %
97.87 %

0.0010
0.0114
0.0169
0.0163
0.0083
0.0050
0.0044
0.0093
0.0053
0.0051
0.0101
0.0118

multi-step prediction model for tool wear and RUL, several classic datadriven models are selected as benchmark models, including gated
recurrent unit (GRU), Bidirectional gated recurrent unit (BiGRU), Bidi­
rectional gated recurrent unit-attention (BiGRU-AT) and temporal con­
volutional network (TCN). The specific parameter settings are as
follows:

• BiGRU: This model stacks two BiGRU layers. The structure as: Input
→ BiGRU_1 (hidden size = 64) → BiGRU_2 (hidden size = 64) → FC
(128 – prediction length) → Output
• BiGRU-AT: This model stacks two BiGRU layers and an attention
layer. The structure as: Input → BiGRU _1 (hidden size = 64) →
BiGRU _2 (hidden size = 64) → Attention → FC (128 – prediction
length) → Output
• TCN: This model stacks two TCN layers. The structure as: Input →
TCN _1 (channels=64, kernel size = 3) → TCN _2 (channels=64,
kernel size = 3) → FC (64 – prediction length) → Output

• GRU: This model stacks two GRU layers. The structure as: Input →
GRU_1 (hidden size = 64) → GRU_2 (hidden size = 64) → FC (64 –
prediction length) → Output

Table 20
Multi-step prediction evaluation results of different models for wear prediction on C1 as the test set.
Prediction steps

Models

RMSE

p-value

MAE

p-value

R2

p-value

12

GRU
BiGRU
BiGRU-AT
TCN
Ours
GRU
BiGRU
BiGRU-AT
TCN
Ours
GRU
BiGRU
BiGRU-AT
TCN
Ours
GRU
BiGRU
BiGRU-AT
TCN
Ours

6.816519 ± 0.226414
5.883704 ± 0.104723
6.415949 ± 0.170464
2.177982 ± 0.187202
0.695181 ± 0.083625
4.925597 ± 0.544839
4.109801 ± 0.218086
4.238184 ± 0.301062
3.517593 ± 0.327430
0.926807 ± 0.115598
6.025938 ± 0.378982
5.514018 ± 0.269543
6.028948 ± 0.273813
5.565059 ± 0.654722
2.003769 ± 0.162016
6.756049 ± 0.110635
6.370425 ± 0.171448
7.332609 ± 0.147934
6.187783 ± 0.928968
3.618621 ± 0.513278

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

5.003335 ± 0.151995
4.378625 ± 0.073482
4.808043 ± 0.120612
1.790663 ± 0.148428
0.445483 ± 0.032034
4.124196 ± 0.518996
3.394999 ± 0.186147
3.654717 ± 0.277366
2.879737 ± 0.205179
0.673762 ± 0.083794
5.272560 ± 0.342073
4.793873 ± 0.254116
5.431356 ± 0.250735
4.196701 ± 0.290760
1.383012 ± 0.094060
5.996743 ± 0.117053
5.592506 ± 0.160964
6.799371 ± 0.168000
4.913894 ± 0.581326
3.035563 ± 0.615452

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

0.927984 ± 0.004788
0.946384 ± 0.001922
0.936222 ± 0.003371
0.992606 ± 0.001212
0.999240 ± 0.000176
0.962021 ± 0.008505
0.973781 ± 0.002774
0.972062 ± 0.003823
0.980692 ± 0.003399
0.998649 ± 0.000328
0.943579 ± 0.007220
0.952822 ± 0.004635
0.943616 ± 0.005038
0.951450 ± 0.012063
0.993742 ± 0.000985
0.929310 ± 0.002340
0.937123 ± 0.003419
0.916719 ± 0.003347
0.939513 ± 0.018811
0.979317 ± 0.005631

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

24

36

48

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00390
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00390
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

195

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00390
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00390
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00390
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00390
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Table 21
Multi-step prediction evaluation results of different models for wear prediction on C4 as the test set.
Prediction steps

Models

RMSE

p-value

MAE

p-value

R2

p-value

12

GRU
BiGRU
BiGRU-AT
TCN
Ours
GRU
BiGRU
BiGRU-AT
TCN
Ours
GRU
BiGRU
BiGRU-AT
TCN
Ours
GRU
BiGRU
BiGRU-AT
TCN
Ours

7.203343 ± 0.200819
6.812207 ± 0.249487
6.807585 ± 0.135898
7.187013± 0.753672
1.220867 ± 0.056582
9.424277 ± 0.233020
9.085784 ±0.151510
8.714979 ± 0.204610
10.156881 ± 0.416958
2.330021 ± 0.140177
12.048714 ± 0.145587
11.540050 ± 0.085638
11.079560 ± 0.236078
13.044765 ± 0.355566
4.418584 ± 0.245182
16.132883 ± 0.254563
15.097078 ± 0.257586
14.530546 ± 0.238987
16.712224 ± 0.466954
6.617436 ± 1.015057

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

5.652372 ± 0.090947
5.258934 ± 0.151196
5.287919 ± 0.180896
6.543157 ± 0.716290
0.701824 ± 0.030466
7.888421 ± 0.152913
7.498165 ± 0.060826
7.229906 ± 0.207204
9.191319 ± 0.422298
1.634829 ± 0.087141
10.367626 ± 0.100668
9.900580 ± 0.079339
9.339531 ± 0.254577
11.374912 ± 0.332240
3.511167 ± 0.227505
13.590275 ± 0.243394
12.580021 ± 0.304919
11.719759 ± 0.336527
13.880547 ± 0.398401
5.356704 ± 0.656749

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

0.961272 ± 0.002185
0.965346± 0.002574
0.965422 ± 0.001375
0.961093 ± 0.008118
0.998885 ± 0.000105
0.933720 ± 0.003286
0.938413 ± 0.002051
0.943324 ± 0.002622
0.922940 ± 0.006253
0.995936 ± 0.000480
0.891709 ± 0.002613
0.900668 ± 0.001477
0.908404 ± 0.003917
0.872997 ± 0.006925
0.985393 ± 0.001599
0.805834 ± 0.006132
0.829960 ± 0.005806
0.842485 ± 0.005163
0.791538 ± 0.011615
0.966570 ± 0.010789

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

24

36

48

0.00781
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00390
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

0.00781
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00390
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

0.00781
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00390
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

Table 22
Multi-step prediction evaluation results of different models for wear prediction on C6 as the test set.
Prediction steps

Models

RMSE

p-value

MAE

p-value

R2

p-value

12

GRU
BiGRU
BiGRU-AT
TCN
Ours
GRU
BiGRU
BiGRU-AT
TCN
Ours
GRU
BiGRU
BiGRU-AT
TCN
Ours
GRU
BiGRU
BiGRU-AT
TCN
Ours

14.355415 ± 0.505413
12.667499 ± 0.479743
11.656284 ± 0.530443
2.993115 ± 0.327376
1.680672 ± 0.137001
17.588708 ± 0.521248
16.574165 ± 0.648025
13.872687 ± 0.540751
4.225212 ± 0.394625
2.220760 ± 0.145516
18.529892 ± 0.393097
17.806705 ± 0.699621
14.959466 ± 0.837783
5.450403 ± 0.707623
3.430798 ± 0.485509
19.109411 ± 0.433723
18.434443 ± 0.559356
15.465276 ± 0.606478
7.418572 ± 0.695875
5.106184 ± 0.690110

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

8.299928 ± 0.302723
7.283514 ± 0.264052
7.017227 ± 0.312688
2.296434 ± 0.308535
0.768368 ± 0.051102
10.900487 ± 0.373268
10.411238 ± 0.374729
8.944786 ± 0.362352
3.186685 ± 0.246354
1.365968 ± 0.069246
12.074598 ± 0.283714
11.720056 ± 0.440885
10.101016 ± 0.519630
4.024043 ± 0.453318
2.652510 ± 0.332187
12.993970 ± 0.289811
12.661441 ± 0.306765
10.859792 ± 0.397641
5.140779 ± 0.213816
4.052427 ± 0.532882

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

0.858260 ± 0.009995
0.889613 ± 0.008454
0.906480 ± 0.008223
0.993779 ± 0.001393
0.998046 ± 0.000323
0.787290 ± 0.012734
0.811011 ± 0.014631
0.867599 ± 0.010198
0.987639 ± 0.002311
0.996597 ± 0.000434
0.764008 ± 0.010077
0.781854 ± 0.016906
0.845818 ± 0.017158
0.979281 ± 0.005628
0.991751 ± 0.002230
0.749001 ± 0.011437
0.766334 ± 0.013983
0.835452 ± 0.012796
0.961890 ± 0.007130
0.981760 ± 0.005227

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195

24

36

48

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00390

In the wear comparative experiment, ten different random seeds
(123, 1117, 1357, 2027, 2469, 3333, 3407, 6666, 7980, 9999) were
utilized to ensure the robustness and reliability of the evaluation results.
Meanwhile, the mean ± standard deviation of the evaluation metrics
(RMSE, MAE, and R2) was calculated from the results of each experi­
mental run.
Furthermore, to assess the statistical significance of the proposed
model’s performance improvement over the baselines, the pairedsample Wilcoxon signed-rank test was employed. This non-parametric
test evaluates differences using the rank information of paired obser­
vations and offers strong robustness, since the data are not assumed to
follow a normal distribution. This approach ensures that the evaluations
are more reliable, and it is widely adopted in engineering and ML ap­
plications for quantifying performance disparities [75,76].
The basic significance level (∝) was set to 0.05 to determine the
presence of significant differences between the proposed and baseline
models, which is a universally accepted standard [77,78]. In addition, a
smaller p-values indicates a higher level of statistical significance for the
observed difference between the proposed model and the baseline
models.
Tables 20–22 present the complete wear prediction and the corre­
sponding Wilcoxon signed-rank test results for test sets C1, C4, and C6

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00390

0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00195
0.00390

across various prediction steps on the PHM2010 dataset. Throughout
these tables, the best performing metric for each prediction step and
evaluation criterion is highlighted.
As shown in Table 20, using C1 as the test set, using C4 and C6 as
training and validation set, the proposed model achieved the best overall
performance across all prediction steps. For the longest 48-step predic­
tion, the proposed model achieved an RMSE of 3.618621 ± 0.513278, an
MAE of 3.035563 ± 0.615452, and an R2 of 0.94317 ± 0.005631.
Compared to best-performing baseline model, the TCN model (RMSE:
6.187783 ± 0.92868; MAE: 4.913894 ± 0.581326; R2: 0.939513 ±
0.018811), the proposed model still maintains the highest accuracy.
Furthermore, the results of the Wilcoxon signed-rank test indicate
that the p-values for all evaluation metrics are less than 0.005 compared
to the baseline model. These robust statistical results strongly confirms
that the performance differences between the proposed model and the
baseline models are highly statistically significant.
Table 21 presents the complete evaluation results across various
prediction steps for test set C4. Consistent with the trend observed in
Table 1, the proposed model achieved the best performance across all
examined prediction steps. The results from the Wilcoxon signed-rank
test confirm the statistical superiority of the proposed model over the
baselines models. Specifically, the p-values obtained from the
196

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Fig. 17. Reliability diagrams obtained using C1 as the test set with the seed set to 123. (a) - (d) 12, 24, 36, 48 step predictions.

perfectly calibrated reference line, where predictions would match the
true values exactly.
To obtain stable and representative statistics across different RUL
ranges, ten equally spaced bins were used. This choice strikes a balance
between smoothness and resolution. In the Fig. 17(a) - (d), the blue binaveraged curves follow an approximately linear trend and remain close
to the ideal calibration line, demonstrating that the model maintains
good overall calibration performance. For the 12 and 24 step pre­
dictions, the blue curves align closely with the ideal line, suggesting
reliable short-term prediction accuracy. For the 36-step and 48-step
predictions, a slight deviation emerges in the low - RUL region, where
the model tends to underestimate the RUL value during the severe wear
stage, the predicted RUL is somewhat lower than the true value,
reflecting a conservative prediction tendency.
Overall, Fig. 17(a) - (d) clearly illustrates the calibration perfor­
mance of the model under different prediction steps. The model exhibits
strong reliability in short-term forecasting (12 and 24 steps). In contrast,
for longer steps (36 and 48 steps), the calibration performance shows
moderate degradation while still staying within an acceptable range.
These results demonstrate that the model possesses good potential for
practical applications in tool health monitoring and remaining life
management.
In addition, the Transformer-based model proposed in this study
demonstrates excellent predictive capability. However, its complex ar­
chitecture results in relatively high computational cost. To assess the
practical feasibility of deploying the model for near real-time tool wear

comparison with the GRU model at the 24-step prediction was 0.00781,
which is slightly higher than the significance outcomes observed when
comparing against the other baseline models. This value remains sub­
stantially below the pre-set significance level of ∝ = 0.05, thereby
confirming that the performance difference is statistically significant.
As illustrated in Table 22, the proposed model achieved the best
performance metrics among all prediction steps. Particularly in 24-step
and 36-step predictions, the RMSE of the proposed model was only
2.220760 ± 0.145516 and 3.430789 ± 0.485509, respectively. The re­
sults of the Wilcoxon signed-rank test confirm the statistical superiority
of the proposed model with extremely high significance. Specifically, all
p-values were recorded at 0.00195, except for the 48-step comparison
against the TCN model, which resulted in a p-values of 0.0039. Both of
these values are far below the ∝ = 0.05.
To evaluate the reliability of the model’s RUL predictions under
different prediction steps, Fig. 17 presents the reliability diagrams ob­
tained using C1 as the test set with the seed set to 123. Fig. 17 (a) - (d)
correspond to prediction horizons of 12, 24, 36, and 48 steps, respec­
tively. Taking Fig. 17 (a) as an example, the horizontal axis represents
the predicted RUL values for the 12-step forecasting task on the C1 test
set, while the vertical axis denotes the corresponding true RUL. The red
scatter points show the paired predicted - true RUL values for all sam­
ples. The blue curve depicts the relationship between the average pre­
dicted and average true RUL within each bin. The gray shaded area
indicates the 90 % confidence interval, reflecting the variability of
prediction errors within each bin. The black dashed line represents the
197

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Table 23
The comparison results of training time (s) and inference time (one multi-step wear sequence prediction) (ms) in PHM2010 dataset.
Models

C1

C4

C6

GRU
BiGRU
BiGRUAT
TCN
Ours
GRU
BiGRU
BiGRUAT
TCN
Ours
GRU
BiGRU
BiGRUAT
TCN
Ours

12-step prediction

24-step prediction

36-step prediction

48-step prediction

Training times
(Wear/RUL)

Inference time
(Wear/RUL)

Training times
(Wear/RUL)

Inference time
(Wear/RUL)

Training times
(Wear/RUL)

Inference time
(Wear/RUL)

Training times
(Wear/RUL)

Inference time
(Wear/RUL)

24.27 / 5.1
14.2 / 4.1
8.25 / 3.56

0.069 / 0.035
0.027 / 0.024
0.029 / 0.026

13.29 / 2.75
5.6 / 2.64
5.39 / 2.45

0.086 / 0.036
0.032 / 0.029
0.035 / 0.031

9.65 / 3.1
5.17 / 2.83
5.71 / 3

0.057 / 0.032
0.036 / 0.033
0.038 / 0.037

6.2 / 4.03
5.36 / 3.48
5.86 / 3.55

0.079 / 0.035
0.042 / 0.038
0.043 / 0.039

4.63 / 1.67
16.47
32.31 / 6.76
13.29 / 4.06
8.85 / 3.68

0.032 / 0.032
0.574
0.068 / 0.035
0.038 / 0.025
0.029 / 0.029

6.64 / 1.81
15.7
26.08 / 3.18
10.76 / 2.68
8.74 / 2.37

0.039 / 0.034
0.798
0.054 / 0.035
0.032 / 0.029
0.03 / 0.031

6.82 / 2.71
38.4
33.62 / 3.1
10.66 / 3.13
8.52 / 3.49

0.041 / 0.039
1.199
0.081 / 0.055
0.038 / 0.033
0.04 / 0.039

4.78 / 3.74
57.3
25.44 / 3.99
11.06 / 3.34
7.94 / 3.81

0.045 / 0.047
1.596
0.1 / 0.034
0.068 / 0.038
0.041 / 0.047

5.93 / 1.58
41.15
17.61 / 4.41
10.48 / 4.46
6.29 / 3.62

0.035 / 0.031
1.281
0.075 / 0.023
0.03 / 0.028
0.29 / 0.027

10.36 / 2.15
28.28
12.1 / 3.14
5.86 / 2.61
6.1 / 2.36

0.04 / 0.04
1.118
0.062 / 0.03
0.033 / 0.029
0.033 / 0.031

12.42 / 3.13
69.64
16.91 / 3.21
6.78 / 3.05
5.88 / 2.94

0.043 / 0.041
1.876
0.1 / 0.044
0.053 / 0.033
0.04 / 0.037

13.96 / 3.58
28.15
9.68 / 5.05
11.13 / 3.85
5.57 / 3.89

0.05 / 0.047
1.416
0.043 / 0.037
0.1 / 0.04
0.041 / 0.046

5.47 / 1.69
64.08

0.036 / 0.031
1.184

6.53 / 1.82
98.56

0.036 / 0.037
1.525

8.6 / 3.03
32.09

0.04 / 0.042
1.379

11.33 / 3.99
29.7

0.049 / 0.048
1.662

Fig. 18. Top 13 feature importance and SHAP value distributions for wear prediction on the C4 test set at different prediction steps using global SHAP analysis (a)(d) SHAP summary plot of the top 13 features for 12, 24, 36, 48 step prediction.
198

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

prediction, both the training time and inference time are reported and
compared with those of the baseline models, including GRU, BiGRU,
BiGRU-AT and TCN. Specifically, the training time indicates the total
time required to train the model on the training dataset, the inference
time is the average time required for predicting one multi-step wear
sequence. All measurements were conducted under the same hardware
conditions. The results are summarized in Table 23.

features tends to be balanced, indicating that the model makes full use
of feature information of different scales in a longer prediction step. It is
worth noting that the SHAP results for 24, 36, and 48 steps show more
obvious discontinuities than those for 12 steps. This suggests that the
nonlinear relationship between features and wear prediction is more
complex. In addition, the physics-enhanced feature ranks highly among
all features, except in the 24-step case, which clearly reflects the ad­
vantages of this method in improving the interpretability and effec­
tiveness of the wear prediction model.
In addition, using C1 as the test set, the overall SHAP analysis of the
top 13 features for its 12-step predictions is presented in Fig. 19. The
results indicate that low-frequency and historical information features
rank among the most important. Notably, the physics-enhanced feature
proposed in this study also demonstrate significant contributions to
wear prediction, ranking 4th, 9th and 9th in initial normal and severe
stage, respectively.
Furthermore, Fig. 20 presents the local SHAP analysis results for the
11th, 174th, and 237th predictions. Taking Fig. 20.a as an example, the
physics-enhanced feature contributes + 0.03 to the prediction, and the
trend_segment_inc_mean feature contributes − 0.01. Overall, under the
cumulative influence of all the features, the base prediction value
increased from 0.045 to 0.58.
The complete global SHAP analysis for wear prediction is shown in
Fig. 21, the importance distribution trend of the C1 and C6 test sets is
consistent with that of the C4 test set in the wear prediction task. For the
12-step prediction, low-frequency information is dominant, and the
total proportion of high-frequency information on C1, C4 and C6 test
sets is only 4.98 %, 0.95 % and 2.28 %, respectively. However, as the
prediction step increases to 24, 36 and 48 steps, the importance of highfrequency information increases significantly. For the 48-step predic­
tion, the proportion of high-frequency information in the three test sets
reaches 49.2 %, 51.3 % and 56.2 %, respectively, approaching parity
with low-frequency information.
It is worth noting that the physics-enhanced feature shows satisfac­
tory results in predicting 12, 24, 36, and 48 steps. Specifically, in the 12step prediction, the importance of this feature in the C1, C4 and C6 test
sets reaches 8.39 %, 8.07 % and 9.69 % respectively. This significantly
proves the effectiveness of the physics-enhanced feature in short-term
prediction. Although its importance fluctuates, its contribution re­
mains significant for 36 and 48-step predictions. On average, the pro­
portion is 1.85 % in the 24-step prediction and rises to 4.55 % in the 36step prediction. Even in the longest prediction of 48 steps, this feature
makes up 2.89 %, 3.79 % and 2.37 % of the three test sets, respectively.
Compared with the proportion of the most important features on each
test set, the average difference of the physics-enhanced feature is only
2.66 %. In summary, it plays a crucial role in tool wear prediction across
most scenarios, particularly in the 12, 24, 36 steps wear prediction tasks.
In addition to the wear prediction evaluation, a global SHAP analysis

4.1.3. SHAP interpretability analysis
SHAP analysis method was proposed by Lundberg and Lee in 2017
[79]. This method treats each feature as a contributor based on game
theory. By calculating its Shapley value, this method quantifies the
marginal contribution of the feature to the model prediction result,
achieving the interpretability of the model. The Shapley value can be
defined as:
φi (f, x) =

∑
S∈N{i}

|S|!(M − |S| − 1 )!
[f(S ∪ {i}) − f(S) ]
M!

(32)

where φi represents the Shapley value of feature i, f denotes the pre­
diction model, x is the specific input, S represents the subset of all fea­
tures except i, and M is the total number of features. f(S) is the prediction
of the subset S.
It should be clarified that no target-derived features enter the model
to avoid compromising the evaluation of model performance and
generalization. Taking the C4 test set as an example, Fig. 18 shows the
analysis results of the top 13 important features (ranked by global SHAP
values) extracted at the prediction time steps of 12, 24, 36, 48 with the
wear as the prediction target. The color bar on the right characterizes the
feature values from low to high. A negative SHAP value indicates that
the feature contributes to a lower prediction value. while a positive
SHAP value suggests a contribution to a higher prediction value. It is
important to note that SHAP values reflect feature contributions to the
output, rather than their impact on prediction performance. For
example, in the 12-step prediction, the yellow points of low_comp_ratio,
low_segment_len_std, and historical RUL are concentrated at negative
SHAP values. This suggests that the lower values of these features
contributing to a decrease in prediction values rather than a deteriora­
tion in the model's predictive performance. A detailed analysis of Fig. 18
reveals that low-frequency features dominates the overall feature
importance in the 12-step prediction, while high-frequency features
contribute relatively less. However, in the context of the 24-step pre­
diction, the importance distribution of high-frequency and lowfrequency features tends to be balanced, although the high-frequency
features are in the forefront. This balance carried over to the 36-step
and 48-step predictions. In general, as the prediction step size in­
creases to 24, 36, and 48, the distribution pattern of feature importance
changes significantly: the importance of high-frequency features grad­
ually increases. The contribution of low-frequency and high-frequency

Fig. 19. Top 13 feature importance and SHAP value distributions for wear prediction on the C1 test across different wear stages using global SHAP analysis (a) - (c)
SHAP summary plot of the top 13 features across initial, normal and severe stage.
199

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Fig. 20. Top 13 feature importance and local SHAP analysis results for wear prediction on the C1 test across for the 11th, 174th, and 237th predictions: (a) 11th, (b)
174th, (2) 237th.

Fig. 21. Heatmap of global SHAP feature importance scores (%) for wear prediction across different test sets and prediction steps.

is performed for RUL prediction. The complete results are presented in
Fig. 22. In the 12-step prediction, the distribution of the importance
proportion exhibits an opposite trend compared to that observed in wear
prediction. Specifically, high-frequency features dominate, whereas
low-frequency features contribute relatively little. However, as the
prediction step increases, the gap between the proportion of lowfrequency information and high-frequency information gradually nar­
rows. In the 48-step prediction, the contributions of low- frequency and
high-frequency features become comparable, with average proportions
of 44.39 % and 47.54 % across the three test sets, respectively.
Compared to wear prediction, the physics-enhanced feature exhibits
slightly lower importance in RUL prediction. In the 12-step prediction,
the importance proportion of the three test sets is only 0.22 %, 0.11 %
and 0.43 %, respectively. However, as the prediction step size increases,
the importance of this feature also increases. In the longest 48-step
prediction, the proportion of this feature rises to 3.53 %, 2.31 % and

2.87 %, respectively. Compared with the other features with highest
proportion in the same prediction step size, the differences are 2.09,
4.32 and 2.27, respectively.
This phenomenon may be due to the effectiveness of the physicsenhanced feature changes dynamically with the prediction step size.
Specifically, the physics-enhanced feature reflects the cumulative pro­
cess of tool wear. In the shorter 12-step prediction, the changes in this
feature are relatively minor, and it is difficult to provide clear infor­
mation for model prediction. In contrast, the other features that exhibit
significant fluctuations are more likely to correlate with the RUL
prediction.
When the prediction step is extended to 24, 36 or 48 steps, the longterm degradation trend becomes increasingly apparent. Meanwhile, this
phenomenon also shows the importance of the model's ability to capture
trend features in long sequence prediction tasks.

200

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Fig. 22. Heatmap of global SHAP feature importance scores (%) for RUL prediction across different test sets and prediction steps.

Fig. 23. Comparative analysis results of wear prediction between the proposed model and constructed comparison models on the T1, T2 and T3 test sets at different
prediction step. (a) - (c) RMSE, MAE, R2 values of proposed model and comparison models.

4.2. Self-constructed dataset

demonstrating the model’s superiority. In the 12-step prediction, the
minimum RMSE of the proposed model is only 2.7786, which signifi­
cantly outperformed other comparison models. In the 24-step predic­
tion, the RMSE is reduced by an average of 15.72 % compared to the
comparison model with the best performance. In the 36-step prediction,
the MAE of the proposed model remained lower than that of the other
models. On the T2 test set, the MAE is reduced by 40.31 % compared to
the best-performing comparison model. In the 48-step prediction on the
T2 test set, the proposed model achieves a 40.87 % reduction in RMSE
and a 30.91 % reduction in MAE compared to the best-performing
comparison model. It is worth noting that, as the prediction step

4.2.1. Comparison experiment
To further validate the generalization ability and accuracy of the
proposed method, comparative experiments are conducted with GRU,
BiGRU, BiGRU-AT and TCN. The hyperparameter settings for these
models are consistent with those detailed in Section 4.1.2.
Fig. 23 presents the comprehensive wear prediction results under
different prediction steps. As can be seen, the proposed model achieved
the best prediction performance in most cases. The prediction metric R²
of the proposed model exceeded 0.96 in all experimental results,

201

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

Fig. 24. Comparative analysis results of RUL prediction between the proposed model and constructed comparison models on the T1, T2 and T3 test sets at different
prediction step. (a) - (c) RMSE, MAE, R2 values of proposed model and comparison models.
Table 24
The comparison results of training time (s) and inference time (one multi-step wear sequence prediction) (ms) in self-constructed dataset.
Models

T1

T2

T3

GRU
BiGRU
BiGRUAT
TCN
Ours
GRU
BiGRU
BiGRUAT
TCN
Ours
GRU
BiGRU
BiGRUAT
TCN
Ours

12-step prediction

24-step prediction

36-step prediction

48-step prediction

Training times
(Wear/RUL)

Inference time
(Wear/RUL)

Training times
(Wear/RUL)

Inference time
(Wear/RUL)

Training times
(Wear/RUL)

Inference time
(Wear/RUL)

Training times
(Wear/RUL)

Inference time
(Wear/RUL)

37.93 / 4
11.63 / 3.33
8.44 / 2.65

0.081 / 0.11
0.026 / 0.039
0.027 / 0.026

39.1 / 3.62
13.11 / 3.53
9.38 / 3.62

0.091 / 0.028
0.066 / 0.03
0.035 / 0.033

22.84 / 2.13
11.19 / 2.25
10.21 / 2.56

0.062 / 0.027
0.048 / 0.033
0.036 / 0.038

30.91 / 2.78
12.25 / 2.64
10.33 / 2.67

0.099 / 0.036
0.04 / 0.036
0.043 / 0.056

6.7 / 1.2
49.86
6.37 / 2.34
5.79 / 2.45
4.88 / 2.39

0.039 / 0.032
1.562
0.047 / 0.023
0.025/ 0.024
0.031 / 0.027

8.59 / 1.67
78.19
22.69 / 3.55
7.55 / 3.41
6.89 / 3.25

0.041 / 0.036
2.4
0.088 / 0.028
0.033 / 0.033
0.033 / 0.03

10.31 / 2.3
80.53
11.08 / 2.25
4.18 / 2.42
4.24 / 2.12

0.043 / 0.038
2.42
0.076 / 0.029
0.35 / 0.035
0.034 / 0.034

17.26 / 3.93
46.25
10.69 / 2.42
4.41 / 2.4
4.77 / 2.94

0.05 / 0.045
1.867
0.09 / 0.036
0.043 / 0.037
0.041 / 0.044

5.98 / 1.25
88.96
12.33 / 2.33
8.85 / 2.93
6.07 / 2.71

0.038 / 0.029
2.203
0.06 / 0.034
0.038 / 0.026
0.03 / 0.026

8.21 / 2.3
14.26
27.35 / 3.55
9.66 / 3.28
7.03 / 3.17

0.044 / 0.04
0.821
0.081 / 0.028
0.031 / 0.029
0.034 / 0.033

9.52 / 3.35
8.62
17.51 / 2.03
7.84 / 2.24
6.88 / 1.99

0.046 / 0.042
0.808
0.082 / 0.028
0.036 / 0.032
0.039 / 0.034

12.22 / 3.51
17.47
20.99 / 2.43
7.77 / 2.23
6.66 / 2.31

0.051 / 0.047
1.067
0.083 / 0.034
0.059 / 0.035
0.038 / 0.038

5.75 / 1.08
22.25

0.037 / 0.033
1.027

7.12 / 1.78
73.76

0.039 / 0.038
3.124

8.01 / 2.72
5.86

0.044 / 0.041
0.785

7.83 / 3.76
28.8

0.047 / 0.044
7.942

Fig. 25. Proportional feature importance for wear prediction across T1, T2, and T3 test sets at different prediction steps based on global SHAP analysis. (a) - (c)
Proportional feature importance for the T1, T2, T3 test set.

202

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

increases, the proposed model’s prediction results show varying degrees
of decline. This is consistent with the results obtained on the PHM2010
dataset.
In addition, a comparative evaluation experiment of RUL is con­
ducted. Fig. 24 presents the comprehensive results of RUL prediction
under different time steps. The results demonstrate that the proposed
model achieves the best performance in all cases. In the 12-step pre­
diction, compared to the best-performing comparison model, the RMSE
of the proposed model is reduced by 77.9 %, 77.69 %, and 76.5 %,
respectively. This significant advantage over other comparison models is
further maintained in the 24, 36 and 48-step predictions. Specifically, in
the 24-step prediction, compared to the best-performing comparison
model, the RMSE is reduced by 64.08 %, 73.25 %, and 51.80 %,
respectively. In the 36-step prediction, compared to the best-performing
comparison model, the MAE of the proposed model is reduced by
60.25 %, 57.35 %, and 75.69 %, respectively. In the longest 48-step
prediction, the proposed model maintained low RMSE and MAE,
significantly outperforming the comparison models. The maximum
RMSE observed is only 2.0209.
Overall, the results demonstrate that the proposed method is
significantly superior to the comparison models in both tool wear and
RUL prediction tasks. The RUL prediction achieves task even higher
accuracy than wear prediction, which aligns with the observations from
the PHM2010 dataset.
Similar to the experiments conducted on the PHM2010 dataset,
Table 24 presents a detailed comparison of computational costs for the
proposed model and the baseline models (GRU, BiGRU, BiGRU-AT,
TCN), reporting both training time and average inference time for
multi-step wear sequence predictions.

the results obtained on the PHM2010 dataset. It is worth noting that
high-frequency information and low-frequency information are
composed of multiple features, and compared to these features, the
importance of the physics-enhanced feature still ranks at the top. Similar
to the physics-enhanced feature, the importance proportion of historical
information is also gradually decreasing. This phenomenon is similar to
the SHAP analysis results on the PHM2010 dataset.
In addition, the SHAP analysis for RUL is also conducted, and the
results are shown in Fig. 26. Overall, the proportion of feature impor­
tance in RUL shows an opposite trend to the wear prediction. Taking the
T1 test set as an example, the proportion of high-frequency information
is 65.5 %, which is much higher than the proportion of low-frequency
information. As the prediction step increases, the proportion of lowfrequency information gradually increases overall. In the 24-step pre­
diction, the proportion of high-frequency information is 47.7 %, and the
proportion of low-frequency information is 42.2 %. In the 36-step and
48-step predictions, the difference with high-frequency information is
approximately 10 %.
In contrast to the wear prediction results, the importance of the
physics-enhanced feature increases as the prediction step increases. In
the 12 and 24-step predictions, the proportion of physics-enhanced
feature is relatively low. However, its importance increases in the 36and 48-step predictions, particularly in the 36-step prediction of the T1
test set, where it reaches 7.2 %. This indicates that in the long-term
prediction of RUL, the physics-enhanced feature can provide more in­
formation. Similar to the trend observed in the importance proportion of
the physics-enhanced feature, the historical information has a lower
proportion of importance in the 12 and 24-step predictions, while it has
a higher proportion of importance in the 36 and 48-step predictions.
Overall, the inputs of the proposed model comprise three compo­
nents: historical information, physics-enhanced feature and physically
meaningful features. Physically meaningful features are extracted by the
fABBA algorithm from multi-band signals of acceleration, AE, and cut­
ting force, which can be further partitioned into low-frequency and
high-frequency information. Notably, the physically meaningful fea­
tures consistently assume a dominant role in the tool wear and RUL
multi-step predictions. The complete prediction results shown in Figs. 25
and 26 proves this point. Taking the T1 test set as an example, the
contribution ratios of these features in 12, 24, 36 and 48-step wear
predictions are 76.3 %, 83 %, 87.9 %, and 88.1 %, respectively.
In summary, the SHAP analysis provides a way to understand the
internal decision-making process of the model. Its results indicate that
both high-frequency and low-frequency information are important for
the model’s predictions. In wear prediction, at the prediction step of 12
steps, low-frequency information dominates. With increasing prediction

4.2.2. SHAP interpretability analysis
SHAP analysis provides a way to deeply understand the model's
decision-making mechanism. Fig. 25 shows the contribution ratios for
the 12, 24, 36 and 48-step predictions from the innermost to the
outermost layers. Fig. 25 (a) shows that, in the 12-step prediction, lowfrequency information dominates the model prediction, while highfrequency information contributes relatively less. As increasing predic­
tion steps, the contribution rate of high-frequency information gradually
becomes equal to the proportion of low-frequency information. This
trend aligns with the results observed on the PHM2010 dataset. For
shorter prediction steps, low-frequency trend information provides
richer information. With increasing prediction steps, the model can
learn equally from low- and high-frequency information.
As the prediction step increases, the importance of the physicsenhanced feature shows a downward trend, which is consistent with

Fig. 26. Proportional feature importance for RUL prediction across T1, T2, and T3 test sets at different prediction steps based on global SHAP analysis. (a) - (c)
Proportional feature importance for the T1, T2, T3 test set.
203

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

steps, the proportion of high-frequency information increases overall.
However, in RUL prediction, the opposite trend is observed. The pro­
posed physics-enhanced feature has a relatively high proportion in most
cases, indicating their importance for the model.

degradation process. Therefore, in the next step, the physical knowledge
of tool wear will be combined with advanced model interpretability
methods to provide a more in-depth interpretation of the prediction
results.

5. Conclusions

CRediT authorship contribution statement

The multi-step prediction of tool wear and RUL is of great signifi­
cance for tool replacement warning and predictive maintenance. This
paper proposes a multi-step wear and RUL prediction method based on
Transformer, which combines time series symbolization, physical
knowledge guidance, and multi-task learning. This method can auto­
matically extract degradation information from machining signals,
achieve accurate and reliable predictions under different prediction
steps, and fully utilize physical information to enhance the interpret­
ability of the outputs. The main conclusions of this study are as follows:

Shanglei Jiang: Funding acquisition, Conceptualization, Method­
ology, Software, Writing – review & editing. Haoyuan Zhang: Meth­
odology, Software, Validation, Writing – original draft. Zhengmao
Chen: Validation, Investigation, Data curation. Yuwen Sun: Project
administration, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Xuexia Liu:
Visualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.

(1) A feature extraction method based on multi-scale physical in­
formation fusion is proposed. In this method, the application of
fABBA based on STSA effectively reduces the dependence of
traditional feature engineering on domain knowledge. Based on
the physical model, a benchmark curve representing the wear
behavior is established and jointly input into the model along
with the automatically extracted features.
(2) The constructed Transformer-based multi-step wear and RUL
prediction model shows good prediction accuracy. Combined
with the proposed physical constraints, it can achieve more
physically interpretable outputs. Comparative experiments on
the PHM2010 public dataset show that for the 12-step prediction,
using C1 as test set, the MAE of wear prediction is only 0.445483
± 0.032034, and the RMSE is 0.695181 ± 0.083625, indicating
that the model can accurately capture the short-term dynamic
characteristics of tool wear. In the longest 48-step forecast, the
proposed model achieved an R2 value of approximately 0.96,
further demonstrating the model's ability to accurately predict
long-term wear trends.
(3) The Bootstrap interval prediction method is introduced to quan­
tify the uncertainty of the model's outputs, and the performance
of the prediction intervals is evaluated by the PICP and PINAW
indicators. The results show that in the severe wear stage, the
PICP value is between 95.2 % and 95.77 %, and the PINAW value
is between 0.0105 and 0.1246. This combination of high
coverage and narrow interval width fully validates the stability
and reliability of the model during critical wear stages.
(4) The SHAP method is used to analyze the decision-making
mechanism of the model. The results show that for wear predic­
tion, in the shorter prediction step (12 steps), low-frequency in­
formation dominates. As the prediction step increases, the
proportion of high-frequency information overall shows an
increasing trend. For RUL prediction, high-frequency information
is dominant in the 12-step prediction, but the importance of lowfrequency information also increases overall with the increase in
the prediction step, revealing the differentiated role of feature
information in different tasks and different prediction steps.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (Grant No. 52205450), the Natural Science Foundation of
Liaoning Province (Grant No. 2024MS167), the Postdoctoral Research
Foundation of China (Grant No. 2023M740459), and the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Provincial Universities of Liaoning (Grant No.
LJ212410150050).
Data availability
The data used in this study are publicly available.
References
[1] Sun Y, Yan S, Sun S, Niu J, Xu J, Chen M, Liu J, Guo D. A review of chatter
suppression in thin-wall milling: strategies, mechanisms, and applications. Int J
Extrem Manuf 2025;7:062003. https://doi.org/10.1088/2631-7990/adec24.
[2] Sun Y, Jia J, Xu J, Chen M, Niu J. Path, feedrate and trajectory planning for freeform surface machining: A state-of-the-art review. Chin J Aeronaut 2022;35:12–29.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cja.2021.06.011.
[3] Yang Y, Yang Y, Liu H-C, Wan M, Zhang W-H. A new cutting tool filled with
metallic lattice and design method for vibration suppression in milling. Mech Syst
Signal Process 2024;212:111310. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2024.111310.
[4] Li W, Fu H, Han Z, Zhang X, Jin H. Intelligent tool wear prediction based on
Informer encoder and stacked bidirectional gated recurrent unit. Robot
ComputIntegr Manuf 2022;77:102368. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rcim.2022.102368.
[5] Sun M, Wang X, Guo K, Huang X, Sun J, Li D, Huang T. Tool wear monitoring based
on physics-informed Gaussian process regression. J Manuf Syst 2024;77:40–61.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2024.09.001.
[6] Bai L, Liu H, Zhang J, Zhao W. Real-time tool breakage monitoring based on
dimensionless indicators under time-varying cutting conditions. Robot Comput
Integr Manuf 2023;81:102502. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2022.102502.
[7] Wang R, Song Q, Peng Y, Qin J, Liu Z, Liu Z. Toward digital twins for highperformance manufacturing: Tool wear monitoring in high-speed milling of thinwalled parts using domain knowledge. Robot ComputIntegr Manuf 2024;88:
102723. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2024.102723.
[8] Ren Y-Y, Wan M, Zhang W-H, Yang Y. A review on methods for obtaining
dynamical property parameters of machining processes. Mech Syst Signal Proc
2023;194:110280. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2023.110280.
[9] Wang Y, Li M, Zheng L, Shi M, Zheng Z, Pei X. Phyformer: A degradation physicsinformed self-data driven approach to machinery prognostics. Adv Eng Inf 2024;
62:102772. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2024.102772.
[10] Taylor FW. On the art of cutting metals. Trans Asme 1907. https://doi.org/
10.1038/scientificamerican01121907-25942supp.
[11] Archard JF. Contact and rubbing of flat surfaces. J Appl Phys 1953;24:981–8.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1721448.
[12] Usui E, Shirakashi T, Kitagawa T. Analytical prediction of cutting tool wear. Wear
1984;100:129–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/0043-1648(84)90010-3.
[13] Kovac P, Gostimirovic M, Rodic D, Savkovic B. Using the temperature method for
the prediction of tool life in sustainable production. Measurement 2019;133:
320–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2018.09.074.
[14] Iyer KSS, Ukhidave VH. Tool life with speed and time dependent failures. Comput
Ind 1981;2:141–5. https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-3615(81)90007-5.

Although the method proposed in this paper has been proven to be
effective in multi-step wear and RUL prediction in the context of tool
wear, several limitations need to be recognized to further address them
in subsequent research. Firstly, in actual machining, the dynamic
changes of cutting parameters have a significant impact on the wear
process. Future research should consider incorporating cutting param­
eters into the model input to enhance practicality. Secondly, tool wear
has multiple manifestations (notch wear, chipping and built-up edge),
and it is necessary to consider these wear forms in the model to improve
prediction accuracy. Finally, although the SHAP analysis method can
reveal feature contributions, it is difficult to represent the wear
204

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

[15] Lau WS, Venuvinod PK, Rubenstein C. The relation between tool geometry and the
Taylor Tool Life Constant. Int J Mach Tool Des Res 1980;20:29–44. https://doi.
org/10.1016/0020-7357(80)90016-5.
[16] Choudhry J, Almqvist A, Larsson R. Improving Archard’s wear model: an energybased approach. Tribol Lett 2024;72:93. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11249-02401888-8.
[17] John R, Lin R, Jayaraman K, Bhattacharyya D. Modified Taylor’s equation
including the effects of fiber characteristics on tool wear when machining natural
fiber composites. Wear 468469 2021:203606. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
wear.2020.203606.
[18] dos Santos AG, da Silva MB, Jackson MJ. Tungsten carbide micro-tool wear when
micro milling UNS S32205 duplex stainless steel. Wear 2018;414–415:109–17.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wear.2018.08.007.
[19] Chen J, Liu W, Deng X, Wu S. Tool life and wear mechanism of
WC–5TiC–0.5VC–8Co cemented carbides inserts when machining HT250 gray cast
iron. Ceram Int 2016;42:10037–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ceramint.2016.03.107.
[20] Bai Y, Wang F, Fu R, Hao J, Si L, Zhang B, Liu W, Davim JP. A semi-analytical
model for predicting tool wear progression in drilling CFRP. Wear 486487 2021:
204119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wear.2021.204119.
[21] Seeholzer L, Krammer T, Saeedi P, Wegener K. Analytical model for predicting tool
wear in orthogonal machining of unidirectional carbon fibre reinforced polymer
(CFRP). Int J Adv Manuf Technol 2022;119:7259–89. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00170-021-08322-6.
[22] Zhang X, Gao Y, Guo Z, Zhang W, Yin J, Zhao W. Physical model-based tool wear
and breakage monitoring in milling process. Mech Syst Signal Proc 2023;184:
109641. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2022.109641.
[23] Kodric M, Korbar J, Pogacar M, Cepon G. Development of a resource-efficient realtime vibration-based tool condition monitoring system using PVDF accelerometers.
Measurement 2025;251:117183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
measurement.2025.117183.
[24] Dahmoune O, Meddour I, Elbah M, Atmaneyallese M, Belhadi S. Development of an
adaptive tool condition monitoring system: integration of case-based reasoning
with CNN. J Intell Manuf 2025. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10845-025-02566-9.
[25] Wang J, Liu H, Qi X, Wang Y, Ma W, Zhang S. Tool wear prediction based on SVR
optimized by hybrid differential evolution and grey wolf optimization algorithms.
CIRP J Manuf Sci Technol 2024;55:129–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cirpj.2024.09.013.
[26] de Leon MAL, Kolarik J, Byrtus R, Koziorek J, Zmij P, Martinek R. Tool condition
monitoring methods applicable in the metalworking process. Arch Comput Method
Eng 2024;31:221–42. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11831-023-09979-w.
[27] Kuntoglu M, Saglam H. ANOVA and fuzzy rule based evaluation and estimation of
flank wear, temperature and acoustic emission in turning. CIRP J Manuf Sci
Technol 2021;35:589–603. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2021.07.011.
[28] Liu Y-P, Kilic ZM, Altintas Y. Monitoring of in-process force coefficients and tool
wear. CIRP J Manuf Sci Technol 2022;38:105–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cirpj.2022.04.009.
[29] Yang B, Wang M, Liu Z, Che C, Zan T, Gao X, Gao P. Tool wear process monitoring
by damping behavior of cutting vibration for milling process. J Manuf Process
2023;102:1069–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.07.077.
[30] Wei X, Liu X, Yue C, Wang L, Liang SY, Qin Y. A multi-sensor signals denoising
framework for tool state monitoring based on UKF-CycleGAN. Mech Syst Signal
Process 2023;200:110420. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2023.110420.
[31] Kullac MT, Cuvalci O. Assessing sine and Gaussian fitting for surface feature
extraction in real-time wear monitoring of turning operations. CIRP J Manuf Sci
Technol 2025;61:51–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2025.05.005.
[32] Huang Z, Shao J, Guo W, Li W, Zhu J, He Q, Fang D. Tool wear prediction based on
multi-information fusion and genetic algorithm-optimized Gaussian process
regression in milling. IEEE Trans Instrum Meas 2023;72:2516716. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TIM.2023.3280531.
[33] Bao C, Yang Y, Xu C. The wear analysis and life prediction of Cr12MoV alloy steel
hammer dies during the radial forging process. CIRP J Manuf Sci Technol 2025;57:
63–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2025.01.002.
[34] Liu Z, Lang Z-Q, Gui Y, Zhu Y-P, Laalej H, Curtis D. Vibration signal-based tool
condition monitoring using regularized sensor data modeling and model frequency
analysis. IEEE Trans Instrum Meas 2024;73:3505313. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TIM.2023.3343825.
[35] Li Y, Wang J, Huang Z, Gao RX. Physics-informed meta learning for machining tool
wear prediction. J Manuf Syst 2022;62:17–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmsy.2021.10.013.
[36] Shi C, Luo B, He S, Li K, Liu H, Li B. Tool wear prediction via multidimensional
stacked sparse autoencoders with feature fusion. IEEE Trans Ind Inf 2020;16:
5150–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2019.2949355.
[37] Wang J, Li Y, Zhao R, Gao RX. Physics guided neural network for machining tool
wear prediction. J Manuf Syst 2020;57:298–310. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmsy.2020.09.005.
[38] Li S, Li J, Zhu K. Application of physics-guided deep learning model in tool wear
monitoring of high-speed milling. Mech Syst Signal Process 2025;224:111949.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2024.111949.
[39] Li Y, Huang X, Gao T, Zhao C, Li S. A wiener-based remaining useful life prediction
method with multiple degradation patterns. Adv Eng Inf 2023;57:102066. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2023.102066.
[40] Li X, Liu X, Yue C, Wang L, Liang SY. Data-model linkage prediction of tool
remaining useful life based on deep feature fusion and Wiener process. J Manuf
Syst 2024;73:19–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2024.01.008.

[41] Li D, Li Y, Liu C. Gaussian process regression model incorporated with tool wear
mechanism. Chin J Aeronaut 2022;35:393–400. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cja.2021.08.009.
[42] Liu Y, Wang T, Sun S, Li Q, Chu F. Physics-informed scaling evolutionary
transformer for In-Situ Tool condition monitoring. IEEEASME Trans Mechatron
2024;29:647–58. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMECH.2023.3303202.
[43] Li S, Lin X, Shi H, Shi Y, Zhu K. Physics-guided deep learning method for tool
condition monitoring in smart machining system. IEEEASME Trans Mechatron
2024;29:2327–37. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMECH.2023.3311435.
[44] Liu Y-P, Kilic ZM, Altintas Y. Monitoring of in-process force coefficients and tool
wear. CIRP J Manuf Sci Technol 2022;38:105–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cirpj.2022.04.009.
[45] Pashmforoush F, Ebrahimi Araghizad A, Budak E. Tool wear prediction in milling
process using physics-informed machine learning and thermo-mechanical force
model with monitoring applications. J Manuf Syst 2025;82:1192–212. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2025.08.014.
[46] Pashmforoush F, Ebrahimi Araghizad A, Budak E. Physics-informed tool wear
prediction in turning process: A thermo-mechanical wear-included force model
integrated with machine learning. J Manuf Syst 2024;77:266–83. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jmsy.2024.09.008.
[47] Sun M, Wang X, Guo K, Huang X, Sun J, Li D, Huang T. Tool wear monitoring based
on physics-informed Gaussian process regression. J Manuf Syst 2024;77:40–61.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2024.09.001.
[48] Hao Y, Zhu L, Wang J, Shu X, Yong J, Xie Z, Qin S, Pei X, Yan T, Qin Q, Lu H. Ballend tool wear monitoring and multi-step forecasting with multi-modal information
under variable cutting conditions. J Manuf Syst 2024;76:234–58. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jmsy.2024.08.002.
[49] Sun M, Han Y, Guo K, Sivalingam V, Huang X, Sun J. A milling tool wear predicting
method with processing generalization capability. J Manuf Process 2024;120:
975–1001. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2024.05.022.
[50] Xue J, Cheng Y, Zhai W, Zhou X, Zhou S. Research on multi-step ahead prediction
method for tool wear based on MSTCN-SBiGRU-MHA. Adv Eng Inform 2025;65:
103219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2025.103219.
[51] Hou W, Guo H, Luo L, Jin M. Tool wear prediction based on domain adversarial
adaptation and channel attention multiscale convolutional long short-term
memory network. J Manuf Process 2022;84:1339–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmapro.2022.11.017.
[52] Dutta S, Pal SK, Sen R. Progressive tool flank wear monitoring by applying discrete
wavelet transform on turned surface images. Measurement 2016;77:388–401.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2015.09.028.
[53] Zhu K, Wong YS, Hong GS. Wavelet analysis of sensor signals for tool condition
monitoring: A review and some new results. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 2009;49:
537–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2009.02.003.
[54] Elsworth S, Guttel S. ABBA: adaptive Brownian bridge-based symbolic aggregation
of time series. Data Min Knowl Discov 2020;34:1175–200. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10618-020-00689-6.
[55] Wang B, Ning Y, Zhang Y. A novel fault diagnosis scheme for rolling bearing based
on symbolic aggregate approximation and convolutional neural network with
channel attention. Meas Sci Technol 2022;33:015016. https://doi.org/10.1088/
1361-6501/ac319a.
[56] Zhao D, Liu S, Miao Z, Zhang H, Wei Y, Xiao S. A Novel Feature Extraction
Approach for Mechanical Fault Diagnosis Based on ESAX and BoW Model. IEEE
Trans Instrum Meas 2022;71:3516011. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TIM.2022.3185658.
[57] Dos Santos ALB, Duarte MAV, Abrão AM, Machado AR. An optimisation procedure
to determine the coefficients of the extended Taylor’s equation in machining. Int J
Mach Tools Manuf 1999;39:17–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0890-6955(98)
00025-X.
[58] Pálmai Z. Proposal for a new theoretical model of the cutting tool’s flank wear.
Wear 2013;303:437–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wear.2013.03.025.
[59] Zhu K, Zhang Y. A generic tool wear model and its application to force modeling
and wear monitoring in high speed milling. Mech Syst Signal Proc 2019;115:
147–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2018.05.045.
[60] Yuan D, Luo T, Zhang D, Zhu K. A Physics-Assisted Online Learning Method for
Tool Wear Prediction. IEEE Trans Instrum Meas 2023;72:3515611. https://doi.
org/10.1109/TIM.2023.3273683.
[61] Zhu K, Guo H, Li S, Lin X. Physics-Informed Deep Learning for Tool Wear
Monitoring. IEEE Trans Ind Inf 2024;20:524–33. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TII.2023.3268407.
[62] Annual Conference of the Prognostics and Health Management Society 2010, PHM
Society (n.d.). 〈https://phmsociety.org/conference/annual-conference-of-thephm-society/annual-conference-of-the-prognostics-and-health-management-societ
y-2010/〉.
[63] Wei P, Li R, Liu X, Gao H, Dai M, Zhang Y, Zhao W, Liu E. Research on tool wear
state identification method driven by multi-source information fusion and multidimension attention mechanism. Robot Comput Integr Manuf 2024;88:102741.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2024.102741.
[64] Sun J, Liu Z, Wang D, Qiu C, Liu H, Huang K, Tan J. A parallel network model:
Intelligent monitoring of tool wear under variable working conditions. Robot
Comput Integr Manuf 2025;96:103065. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rcim.2025.103065.
[65] Yang Q, Mishra D, Awasthi U, Bollas GM, Pattipati KR. Tool wear and remaining
useful life estimation in precision machining using interacting multiple model.
J Manuf Syst 2024;74:367–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2024.04.001.

205

S. Jiang et al.

CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology 65 (2026) 179–206

[66] Sun M, Guo K, Zhang D, Yang B, Sun J, Li D, Huang T. A novel exponential model
for tool remaining useful life prediction. J Manuf Syst 2024;73:223–40. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2024.01.009.
[67] Zhao H, Meng J, Peng Q. Early perception of Lithium-ion battery degradation
trajectory with graphical features and deep learning. Appl Energy 2025;381:
125214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2024.125214.
[68] Wang P, Liu J, Qi J, Zhou K, Zhai H. Multi-task dual-level adversarial transfer
learning boosted RUL estimation of CNC milling tools. KnowlBased Syst 2025;312:
113152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2025.113152.
[69] Nguyen H-P, Liu J, Zio E. A long-term prediction approach based on long shortterm memory neural networks with automatic parameter optimization by Treestructured Parzen Estimator and applied to time-series data of NPP steam
generators. Appl Soft Comput 2020;89:106116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
asoc.2020.106116.
[70] Wang H, Bai Q, Zhang J, Chen S, Xu X, Wang T. Tool wear monitoring strategy
during micro-milling of TC4 alloy based on a fusion model of recursive feature
elimination-bayesian optimization-extreme gradient boosting. J Mater Res
TechnolJMRT 2024;31:398–411. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmrt.2024.06.076.
[71] Jiang W, Lin P, Liang Y, Gao H, Zhang D, Hu G. A novel hybrid deep learning model
for multi-step wind speed forecasting considering pairwise dependencies among
multiple atmospheric variables. Energy 2023;285:129408. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.energy.2023.129408.
[72] Bi Q, Bai Y, Hou Z, Wang R. Hybrid neural network wind speed prediction based on
two-level decomposition and weighted averaging. Earth Sci Inf 2024;17:4213–32.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12145-024-01388-2.

[73] Qin S, Wang BX, Tsai T-R, Wang X. The prediction of remaining useful lifetime for
the Weibull k-out-of-n load-sharing system. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 2023;233:109091.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2023.109091.
[74] Nguinabe J, Rockefeller R, Khan NM, Rodrigues PC. Bootstrap prediction intervals
for the long short term memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network. Expert Syst Appl
2025;284:127728. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2025.127728.
[75] Pereira RBD, Gómez-Escudero G, Calleja-Ochoa A, Pereira O, González-Barrio H,
Brandão LC, de Lacalle LNL. Hybrid cryogenic/MQL helical milling for holemaking of Inconel 718. Results Eng 2025;26:104776. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rineng.2025.104776.
[76] Khalid OW, Isa NAM, Lim WH. Self-adaptive Emperor Penguin Optimizer with
multi-strategy parameter adaptation mechanism for complex optimization
problems. Alex Eng J 2025;120:657–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
aej.2025.02.046.
[77] Ding G, Georgilas I, Plummer A, Ding G, Georgilas I, Plummer A. A deep learning
model with a self-attention mechanism for leg joint angle estimation across varied
locomotion modes. Sensors 2023;24. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24010211.
[78] Alostad J, Alazmi FE, Alfayly A, Alshehab AJ. Detection of fault events in software
tools integrated with human-computer interface using machine learning. Appl Sci
Basel 2025;15:10030. https://doi.org/10.3390/app151810030.
[79] Lundberg SM, Lee S-I. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In:
Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc; 2017. p. 4768–77.

206

